Hakai Nearshore Marine Ecology
Rocky Intertidal Survey Methods

2019 Hakai Institute
G. Sadlier-Brown, A. Gehman, T. Froese



Introduction 2

Hakai Rocky Intertidal Research Objectives 2

Hakai Central Coast Rocky Intertidal Study Sites 3

Survey Design 9

Survey Protocol Overview 10

Field Protocols 12
Point Intercept Plot Monitoring 12

Barnacle Dynamics: Point Intercepts 13
Mussel Dynamics: Point Intercepts 14
Fucus Dynamics: Point Intercepts 15

Motile Invertebrates: Biodiversity 17
Mussel Dynamics: Length and Bed Depth 20
Surfgrass Community Structure 23

Motile Invertebrates 23
Length and Density 24

Seastar and Macroinvertebrate Dynamics: Swaths 26
Mussel Growth Experiment 30
Surface Water Grab Samples 34

Field Protocols 34
Lab Protocols 35

Appendix 39
Appendix A. Data Sheets 39

Appendix A1. Field Cover Sheet 39
Appendix A2. Point Intercept Plot Survey Data Sheet 40
Appendix A3. Motile Invertebrates: Biodiversity Data Sheet 42
Appendix A4. Mussel Dynamics: Length and Bed Depth Data Sheet 43
Appendix A5. Surfgrass Community Structure: Motile Invertebrate Data Sheet 44
Appendix A6. Surfgrass Community Structure: Length and Density Data Sheet 45
Appendix A7. Seastar and Macroinvertebrate Swath Data Sheet 46
Appendix A8. Leather Chiton Swath Data Sheet 48

Appendix B. Invertebrate Species List 49
Appendix C. Macroalgae Species List 52
Appendix D. UCSC Wasting Disease Categories 53

References 56

1



Introduction

The Hakai Nearshore Research Program documents long term observations of
ecosystem, community and population change in nearshore habitats, and addresses the
factors driving spatial and temporal variation in these systems. Rocky shores account
for more than 33% of the world's coastal shorelines (Johnson, 1988), and are amongst
the dominant coastal habitats in British Columbia, extending along over 50% of the BC
coastline (Reshitnyk, pers. comm.). Rocky shore intertidal benches are biodiverse,
serving as important habitat for sessile invertebrates, nursery and feeding habitat for
fish and crustaceans (Rilov and Schiel, 2006; Dias et. al, 2016) and feeding and
roosting ground for birds (Marsh, 1986). Characterized by strong environmental
gradients and interacting species competing for space and other resources, rocky
shores provide an excellent backdrop to evaluate climate change effects, scaling
between individual, population, community and ecosystem level effects. Many rocky
shore intertidal species are indicators of environmentally driven change to marine
ecological communities. As such, they act as sentinels to the biological costs of climate
change (Denny, 1987; Helmuth et. al., 2002, Harley, 2011).

The Hakai Institute Rocky Intertidal Program aims to evaluate the trends and key
drivers of change within the rocky shore intertidal ecosystem on Calvert Island, BC. We
are dedicated to documenting annual trends in biodiversity and annual and seasonal
trends of indicator species abundance to achieve focal research objectives. These data
provide an essential resource for us to determine changes in the intertidal community
under continual exposure to a changing climate. This document focuses on methods for
documenting temporal and spatial dynamics within the rocky intertidal ecosystem.

Hakai Rocky Intertidal Research Objectives

● Track seasonal and annual changes in indicator species productivity and
biodiversity

● Determine the drivers of change in rocky intertidal ecosystems
● Assess resilience of rocky intertidal species to disturbance, stress and disease
● Understand connectivity between rocky intertidal ecosystems and other coastal

ecosystems

Focal Research Questions:
1. What are the seasonal and interannual drivers of variability in abundance and

distribution of rocky intertidal indicator species (barnacles, mussels, Fucus spp.,
surfgrass)?

2



2. Does rocky intertidal habitat complexity drive mobile invertebrate biodiversity?
3. Are rocky intertidal habitats on Calvert Island resilient to disturbance, stress and

disease?
4. What are the costs of asteroid idiopathic wasting syndrome for intertidal sea stars

and their community?

Hakai Central Coast Rocky Intertidal Study Sites

Nearshore Marine Ecology rocky intertidal study sites on exposed coast were
established in 2016 to encompass sufficient habitat in the low, mid and high intertidal
zones in order to conduct long-term research. Sites were selected to monitor sessile
invertebrate and macroalgal substrate coverage, surfgrass meadow characteristics,
macro-invertebrate biodiversity, density, abundance and disease status and water
chemistry characteristics. Methods were developed with a goal of data comparison
capability across Hakai Institute projects and habitats. Proximity to the Calvert Island
Ecological Observatory was also a factor in site selection, as the exposed rocky
coastline complicates boat access.

Seasonal observations of indicator species abundance and the diversity of their
associated mobile invertebrate communities were conducted (February, May, June,
August, November) at rocky intertidal sites (n=3) on Calvert Island (Fig. 1, red squares).

3



A. B.

C.

Figure 1. Map of rocky intertidal study sites and mussel growth experiments (red) on
Calvert Island, British Columbia. West Beach (A), North Beach (B) and Fifth Beach (C)
study sites have been surveyed since 2016, while the mussel growth experiments
began in 2017.

4



Figure 2. Map of Fifth Beach rocky intertidal and mussel growth experiment study site
(51.64068 ° N, -128.156779 ° W) including bolt locations with modeled elevations (m)
on Calvert Island, British Columbia. Pink lines indicate permanent plots (75cm x 50cm).
Top right: Overview of full site with species specific survey locations indicated in subset
boxes. Blue box indicates Fucus spp. permanent plots and temperature logger. Green
box indicates barnacle permanent plots, surfgrass bolts and Martone Lab permanent
bolts. Red box indicates mussel permanent plots and mussel experiment. Top left:
Fucus spp. plots 1-5 and temperature logger location with modeled elevations (m).
Bottom: Barnacle permanent plots 1-5, surfgrass transect and Martone Lab permanent
bolts with modeled elevations (m). Bottom inset (red box): Mussel permanent plots
1-5 and mussel growth experiment locations with modeled elevations (m).

5



Figure 3. Map of North Beach and Crazytown rocky intertidal and mussel growth
experiment study site (51.66508° N,  -128.1347° W) including bolt locations with
modeled elevations (m) on Calvert Island, British Columbia. Pink lines indicate
permanent plots (75cm x 50 cm). Bottom left: Overview of full site with species specific
survey locations indicated in subset boxes. Red box indicates Fucus spp. permanent
plots, temperature logger and Martone Lab permanent bolt locations at North Beach.
Yellow box indicates barnacle permanent plots. Orange box indicates mussel
permanent plots, surfgrass transect and mussel growth experiment locations.Top left:
Barnacle plots 1-5 with modeled elevations (m) at Crazytown. Top right: Fucus spp.
permanent plots, temperature logger and Martone Lab permanent bolt locations with
modeled elevations (m) at North Beach. Bottom right: Mussel plots 1-5, surfgrass
transect and mussel growth experiment locations with modeled elevations (m) at
Crazytown.

6



Figure  4. Map of West Beach rocky intertidal and mussel growth experiment study site
(51.657423 °N, -128.148814°W) including bolt locations with modeled elevations (m) on
Calvert Island, British Columbia. Pink lines indicate permanent plots (75cm x 50 cm).
Top right: Overview of full site with species specific survey locations indicated in subset
boxes. Blue box indicates barnacle and fucus permanent plots, surfgrass transect and
temperature logger.  Green box indicates permanent mussel plots and mussel growth
experiment.Top left: Mussel plots 1-5 and mussel growth experiment locations with
modeled elevations (m). Bottom: Barnacle plots 1-5, Fucus spp. plots 1-5 and
surfgrass transect bolt locations with modeled elevations (m).

7



Survey Design

At Hakai Nearshore Marine Ecology rocky intertidal study sites (n=3), field
technicians conduct plot and transect-level surveys at permanent locations targeting
specific environmental conditions (e.g. tidal heights, exposure). To evaluate change
over time, permanent 50cm x 75cm plots (n=15 per site) delineated by bolts drilled into
intertidal rock have been installed in 3 zones classified by sessile invertebrate and
macroalgal substrate coverage: barnacle (n=5), mussel (n=5) and Fucus spp. (n=5).
Surfgrass communities are observed along fixed 10m transects that run parallel to
shore (n=1 transect per site). Seastar and other macro-invertebrate swath surveys are
conducted in the high, mid and low intertidal zones within a 30m boundary horizontal to
the shoreline. Intertidal temperature loggers associated with each habitat type (n=4 per
site) have been installed to monitor changes in ocean conditions (Figure 5).

Figure 5. Temperature logger installation at Fifth Beach. Protective cages have
been installed to prevent damage. Temperature loggers record temperature
every 10 minutes year round. Data is downloaded regularly.

8



Survey Protocol Overview

During each seasonal rocky intertidal site visit, Hakai Institute field technicians conduct
plot and transect-level surveys to record sessile invertebrate and macroalgae substrate
coverage, Phyllospadix spp. meadow characteristics, macro-invertebrate biodiversity,
density, abundance and disease status and water chemistry characteristics (Table 2).

Table 2. Surveys conducted at rocky intertidal sites and respective metrics obtained.
Parameters Collected

Survey Frequency Level
Field Lab

Phyllospadix Record: percent cover, bed
spp. cover and Seasonal Transect thickness, shoot density,
biomass flowering shoot density,

epiphytes, canopy height
Pisaster Seasonal
ochraceu Annual Swath Record: density, abundance, size,

s wasting disease status
Katharina
tunicata Seasonal Swath Record: density, abundance, size

All Macro-
invertebrates Seasonal Swath Record: density, species,

abundance, size
Barnacle abundance and diversity of
abundance and Seasonal Plot Balanus glandula, Semibalanus
diversity cariosus, and Chthamalus spp.

Mussel Record: abundance, length, bed
abundance Seasonal Plot depth, growth of Mytilus

californianus
Prepare
herbarium

Record: Fucus distichus percent specimens
Fucus cover & cover and diversity of other algae for
biomass Seasonal Plot Collect: algal specimens that assistance

technicians are unable to with
properly identify in the field identificatio

n at a later
date

9



Mobile Record: abundance, diversity,
invertebrate Seasonal Plot patchiness, substrate
diversity associations in barnacle, mussel,

Fucus and Phyllospadix surveys
Record: YSI measurements: filter for

Water
Chemistry Seasonal Site temperature, conductivity, salinity, chlorophyll,

pH do13C,
Collect: water samples nutrients

10



Field Protocols

Point Intercept Plot Monitoring

Research Objectives:
Do Fucus spp., barnacle (Balanus glandula and Chthamalus dalli), and mussel
coverage change over time (seasonally and annually)?

Equipment
75 x 50 cm strung quadrat (x2)
Clipboard (x2)
Pencils
Data sheets (barnacles, mussels, fucus)
Knee pads
Site and plot number labels

Monitoring Parameters
● Photographic record of plots
● Percent cover of macrophytes (understory and overstory)
● Percent cover of sessile invertebrates (understory and overstory)

Set Up
At each site, point intercept surveys will be conducted on a total of 15 plots

(target species: barnacle plots (x5), mussel plots (x5), fucus plots (x5)). Each plot is
marked by 3 corner bolts and zip ties. The plot numbers are labelled by notches (1-5)
engraved into the corner bolt of each plot, where the number of notches indicates the
plot number. Each 75 x 50 cm strung quadrat consists of 100 point intercepts where the
nylon string has been woven through to make a taught grid.

Point Intercept Plot Survey

Surveys require two technicians; an observer and a recorder. These surveys are
focused on sessile invertebrates and macrophytes, so motile invertebrates are
not recorded. If a motile invertebrate is present at a point-intercept, record what is
underneath the motile invertebrate (e.g. rock). Avoid removing organisms from the

11



surface. Invertebrates such as limpets and chitons have lower survival rates after being
pried off of rocks.
Photograph all plots (barnacle, mussel and Fucus; #1-5)

1. Photograph each permanent point intercept plot with the 50 x 75 cm quadrat on
top. Place the 50 x 75 cm quadrat on top of the three corner bolts that denote the
plot number for each plot type. The corner bolts should line up with the corners of
the quadrat.

2. Write the plot number, plot type, site and date on the label plate with the dry
erase marker. If it is raining, make labels using duracopy paper beforehand.
Ensure the label is visible in the photo and the long (75 cm) side of the quadrat
with 2 bolts is at the top of photo frame.

Other field technicians are encouraged to begin sampling while one technician begins
taking photos.

Barnacle Dynamics: Point Intercepts
1. Place a 75 cm x 50 cm strung quadrat on top of barnacle point intercept plot #1

so that the 3 corner bolts line up with the corners of the quadrat, with the long (75
cm) side of the quadrat at the top.

2. Starting at the top left point intercept of the 75 x 50 cm strung quadrat, record the
understory species that is present directly underneath the intersection of the
strings for 50 points on the grid. The understory species refers to the
organism that is attached to the substrate. For barnacle plots, the understory
species must be a sessile invertebrate or algae (e.g. Balanus glandula,
Chthamalus dalli, Semibalanus cariosus, Fucus distichus, Pyropia spp. etc.).
Dead remnants of sessile species are also recorded (e.g. dead Balanus
glandula). If there is no invertebrate or algae present, record the substrate (eg.
rock). Do not record the presence of mobile invertebrates (record the substrate
underneath the organism (eg. rock)), except if mobile invertebrates with limited
mobility (e.g. limpets and chitons). Do not move mobile invertebrates with limited
motility, in this case record the organism present as the understory species.

3. If there is another species (sessile invertebrate or macrophyte) growing on top of
or covering the understory species at a point intercept, record this as the
overstory species.

It is important to record these data in the correct order so the grid on the data
sheet matches the grid on the strung quadrat. Record odd point intercepts for
columns 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9. Record even point intercepts for columns 2, 4, 6, 8 and

12



10. Start at the top left point intercept and continue on downwards, working to the
right.

Note: During winter sampling, the number of point intercepts recorded is
scaled back to 25 points. Record odd point intercepts for columns 1,5 and
9. Record even point intercepts for columns 3 and 7.

4. Repeat steps 1 and 2 with barnacle point intercept plots #2, #3, #4 and #5.

Figure 6. Barnacle Plot within 50 cm by 75 cm quadrat.

Mussel Dynamics: Point Intercepts
1. Place a 75 x 50 cm strung quadrat on top of mussel point intercept plot #1 so that

the 3 corner bolts line up with the corners of the quadrat, with the long (75 cm)
side of the quadrat at the top.

2. Starting at the top left point intercept of the 75 x 50 cm strung quadrat, record the
understory species that is present directly underneath the intersection of the
strings for 50 points on the grid. The understory species refers to the
organism that is attached to the substrate. For mussel plots, the understory
species must be a sessile species (e.g.. Mytilus californianus, Balanus glandula,
Chthamalus dalli, Semibalanus cariosus, Pollicipes pollicipes, etc.). Dead
remnants of sessile species are also recorded (e.g. dead M. californianus).  If
there is no animal present, record the substrate (eg. rock). Do not record the
presence of mobile invertebrates (record the substrate underneath the organism
(eg. rock)). Do not move mobile invertebrates with limited motility (e.g. limpets
and chitons). In this case, record the organism present as the understory
species.

It is important to record these data in the correct order so the grid on the data
sheet matches the grid on the strung quadrat. Record odd point intercepts for

13



columns 1,3,5, 7 and 9. Record even point intercepts for columns 2,4,6, 8 and
10. Start at the top left point intercept and continue on downwards, working to the
right.

Note: During winter sampling, the number of point intercepts recorded is
scaled back to 25 points. Record odd point intercepts for columns 1,5 and
9. Record even point intercepts for columns 3 and 7.

3. If there is another species (sessile invertebrate or macrophyte) growing on top of
or covering the understory species at a point intercept, record this as the
overstory species (e.g. Endocladia muricata, Fucus distichus, Semibalanus
cariosus).

4. Repeat with mussel point intercept plots #2, #3, #4 and #5.

Figure 7. Mussel plot within 50 cm by 75 cm quadrat.

Fucus Dynamics: Point Intercepts
1. Place a 75 x 50 cm strung quadrat on top of fucus point intercept plot #1 so that

the 3 corner bolts line up with the corners of the quadrat, with the long (75 cm)
side of the quadrat at the top. Do not disturb the algae within the plot prior to
quantification.

2. Starting at the top left point intercept of the 75 x 50 cm strung quadrat, record the
overstory species (eg. Fucus spp.) that is present directly underneath the
intersection of the strings. In the same location, gently move the overstory
species aside and record the understory species (eg. non-coralline crust,
Endocladia muricata, Chthamalus spp., rock). The understory species may be a
macrophyte or a sessile invertebrate. If the point intersect falls on Fucus spp.
with a stipe or holdfast as the understory, record Fucus spp. as the overstory and
the understory for this point. Continue recording overstory and understory for all
100 point intercepts on the strung quadrat. It is important to record this data in

14



the correct order. Start at the top left point intercept and continue on
downwards, working to the right.

Note: During winter sampling, the number of point intercepts recorded is
scaled back to 50 points. Record odd point intercepts for columns 1, 3, 5,
7 and 9. Record even point intercepts for columns 2, 4, 6, and 8.

3. Repeat with Fucus distichus point intercept plots #2, #3, #4 and #5.

Figure 8. Fucus plot within 50 cm by 75 cm strung quadrat.

Workflow Guidelines
● The recorder is encouraged to use the program wide species codes, but can use

different codes in the field if the recorder defines them on the data sheet.
● For mussel and Fucus spp. point intercept plots, the sampler and the recorder

must make sure to communicate that the point intercept locations match the
locations on the corresponding datasheet for all points on the grid. Check in with
each other as you go!

● For each point intercept on the datasheet, the overstory species is recorded in
the top left of the square and the understory species is recorded in the bottom
right of the square.

● Data management: When entering Rocky Intertidal data post field monitoring, we
have changed these species codes so they are consistent with other Hakai
Nearshore Ecology habitat data for data management purposes. Please see the
“Species Codes” tab on the Rocky Intertidal Data Entry Spreadsheet (in Google
Drive).

Scoring Guidelines
1. Record the species code for the top-most organism/substrate first (see rules below for weedy

species and cases where there are >2 layers).

15



2. Record the species code for the bottom-most organism/substrate second. If there is only a single
layer, record this species code as the bottom organism/substrate. If the same species occurs in
the top-most and bottom-most layers (e.g. "Fucus" canopy over "Fucus" holdfast), then record
Fucus as the bottom and top layers (e.g. Fucus over Fucus)..

3. Only record rock  or sand under a species if you can actually see it. For example Fucus on rock is
acceptable (as long as you don’t hit a holdfast), but Chthamalus on rock is just recorded as “NA”
on Chthamalus.

4. If there are >2 layers, record only the uppermost BIOLOGICAL layer (not ephemeral) and
lowermost Biological species;. Some examples to illustrate how to record data for points with >2
layers:

a. Fucus on Chthamalus on Mytilus, record top layer=Fucus and bottom layer=Mytilus.
b. Dead Balanus glandula on Semibalanus on Mytilus, record top layer=Dead Balanus

glandula, bottom layer=Mytilus.
c. Mastocarpus over Endocladia over Semibalanus, record top layer=Mastocarpus, bottom

layer=Semibalanus.
5. Do not score mobile invertebrates (e.g. Tegula, Nucella). Instead, score the organism/substrate

underneath them. Exception: large or immovable motile invertebrates such as Pisaster or
chitons, where the individual takes up too much space for the sampler to be sure what substrate
is under the animal at that point.

6. Epoxy corner markers and bolts should be scored as “rock”.
7. When sand is present under a point, if you can identify what is under the sand, then score the

underlying species or substrate; otherwise score as “sand”.

Motile Invertebrates: Biodiversity

Research Objectives:
Are the infaunal mobile invertebrate communities in Fucus spp. beds, mussel beds and
barnacle-inhabited substrate changing over time (seasonally and annually)?
Does the primary substrate holder (i.e. Fucus spp. beds, mussel beds and barnacle)
alter the invertebrate community size and abundance?

Equipment
75 x 50 cm quadrat (unstrung)
20 x 20 cm string quadrat
Calipers
Clipboard
Clickers
Pencil
Data sheets (3 per site)
Knee pads

16



Parameters
● Counts and sizes (cm) of mobile invertebrates associated with three substrates

(barnacle, mussel, Fucus)

Set Up
Motile invertebrate biodiversity counts and measurements will be conducted on a

total of 15 permanent plots (5 barnacle plots, 5 mussel plots, 5 fucus plots) per site.

Motile Invertebrate Biodiversity and Density
1. Place a 75 x 50 cm quadrat (unstrung) on top of the three corner bolts that

denote the plot number for each plot type. The corner bolts should line up with
the corners of the quadrat.

2. Count all the motile invertebrates specified in the topmost section of the
datasheet within the entire 75 x 50 cm quadrat.

3. Count and measure (first 10 encountered only) the species in the second section
of the datasheet within the entire 75 x 50 cm quadrat.

4. Using the 20 x 20cm string quadrat, subdivide the plot into 3 subsections in the
top left, middle and bottom right of the 75 x 50 cm quadrat (see diagram for
approximate locations). Within each subsection, sub-sample all small limpets (<5
mm) and medium limpets (5-15 mm) and record the counts in the corresponding
boxes.
Note: If small and/or medium limpets are extremely abundant in the 20 x 20 cm
quadrat, subsample a 10 x 10cm subsection within the top left quarter of the 20 x
20 cm quadrat and note this on the datasheet. Alternatively, if there are no
limpets in the 20 x 20 cm quadrat and limpets are present in the 75 x 50 cm
quadrat, count the limpets in entire quadrat.

17



5. Within each 20 x 20cm subsection, count all Littorina spp. within the top left
quarter (10 x 10cm area) of the quadrat (visually estimate area for subsample)
Note: If there are no Littorina spp. in the 10 x 10cm subsection and are present
in the 20 x 20cm quadrat, count the Littorina spp. 20 x 20cm quadrat and record
this on the datasheet.

6. Repeat steps 1-6 for all 15 point permanent plots (Fucus spp., mussels and
barnacles).

Guidelines
● Take photos and sample point intercept plots prior to conducting mobile

invertebrates survey to prevent rearrangement of foliose algae (especially
important for fucus plots).

● Mobile invertebrates may be gently removed from the plot for measuring if it is
too difficult to measure them (be sure to put them back!). Some whelks may be
lodged in crevices in the rocks.

18



Figure 9. Mussel, barnacle and Fucus plots within 50 cm by 75 cm unstrung quadrat.

19



Mussel Dynamics: Length and Bed Depth

Research Objectives:
Does mussel bed depth change over time?
Does average mussel size change over time?

Equipment
50 x 75 cm quadrat (unstrung)
20 x 20 cm quadrat
Calipers
Clipboard
Pencil
Data sheet (1 per site)
Depth measuring skewer
Knee pads
Lumber chalk

Parameters
● Mussel bed depth to approximate biomass
● Mussel length (subsample)

Set up
At each site, mussel length and bed depth measurements will be conducted on 5

plots. The same permanent plots for the mussel point intercept surveys will be sampled.
Each plot is marked by 3 corner bolts and zip ties. The plot numbers are labeled by
notches (1-5) engraved into the corner bolt of each plot, where the number of notches
indicates the plot number.

Mussel Length Sampling
1. Place a 50 x 75 cm quadrat (unstrung) on top of the mussel point intercept plot

#1 so that the 3 corner bolts line up with the corners of the quadrat, with the long
(75 cm) side of the quadrat at the top (which is denoted by two bolts). Within the
50 x 75 cm quadrat, place the 20 x 20 cm quadrat in each of the 5 locations
detailed in the diagram below, moving in order from the top left (1), bottom left
(2), middle (3), top right (4) then bottom right (5).

2. In each of the 5 locations of the 20 x 20 cm quadrat, measure the length (to the
nearest cm) of mussel(s) visible directly under each of the 2 designated points

20



(indicated by stars in diagram below). There will be a total of 10 measurements
per 50 x 75 cm quadrat. If there is no mussel under a point, measure the length
of the mussel nearest to the point that can be found within the 50 x 75 cm
photoplot (also measure bed/patch depth at this mussel- see Mussel Bed Depth
section). A mussel is only measured once, so if a mussel is also closest to
another designated point, the next closest non-measured mussel is chosen. Use
lumber chalk to distinguish measured mussels. For example, if there are only 16
mussels in a 1 layer clump in the 50 x 75 cm plot, 10 of these 16 mussels would
be measured no matter where the clump occurs in the plot.

3. To measure a mussel, rest the end of the caliper (A in diagram) against one end
of the mussel. Slide the caliper open until the tip of the rod (B) reaches the end of
the mussel. Read mussel length on the scale (C) to the nearest centimeter. For
extra thick mussel beds, a long rod/skewer and ruler can be used in place of the
caliper.

4. On the datasheet, tick the box in the “Top” column that accords to the size of the
mussel.

5. If the bed/patch has multiple layers, also measure any deeper mussel under the
point that can be reasonably measured without undue disturbance to the bed. On
the datasheet, tick the box in the “Under” column that accords to the size of the
mussel (note that all understory measurements are pooled). There is no need to
indicate whether a mussel is attached to another mussel or to the substrate.

6. Repeat steps #1-5 for mussel photoplots #2, #3, #4 and #5.

NOTE: For plots where mussels are rare or absent, there may be <10 or even 0
measurements. For plots containing 10 or more mussels, a total of at least 10 length
measurements will be recorded (more if multiple measureable mussels occur below any
of the 10 designated).

21



Mussel Bed Depth Sampling
1. For all 50 x 75 cm plots with more than 10 mussels, measure the bed depth (to

the nearest cm) of the mussel(s) directly under the upper left point (corner star-
see diagram). A total of 5 bed depths will be measured per 50 x 75 cm quadrat
(unless there are fewer than 10 mussels in the 50 x 75 cm quadrat).

2. The measurement is taken perpendicular to the substrate orientation under the
point, upwards from the substrate to the top of the mussel that lies directly under
the top point. There is no need to record the layering status. Since the layering
rod cannot go through the mussels, place it in a nearby gap and project across to
the point location (a small ruler can help with this projection).

Note: For single layer mussel oriented vertically by the longest length, the mussel
length and bed depth measurements will be the same. However, since mussels vary in
orientation, and multilayering may occur, the 2 measurements will rarely be the same.
If the entire plot is an obvious monolayer, then put a check in the monolayer box, if not,
leave it blank, but still measure the bed depth.

Guidelines
● Mussel bed thickness is sampled to approximate population biomass (when

combined with separately scored mussel cover in photoplot). There is no need to
measure bed depth if less than 10 mussels occur in plot (we can get approximate
biomass from length measurements).

● In cases where no mussel is present under the designated point (would have
been previously noted in Mussel Length Sampling), measure bed depth where
the next closest mussel in the 50 x 75 cm photoplot is located.

22



Surfgrass Community Structure

Research Objectives:
Does Phyllospadix coverage change over time?
Is the Phyllospadix infaunal community changing over time?

Equipment
50m transect tape
Tape measure
25cm x 25cm strung quadrat
25cm x 25cm unstrung quadrat
Clipboard
Pencil
Datasheets

Monitoring parameters
● Phyllospadix spp. shoot density
● Reproductive status of surfgrass (flowering shoot density)
● Phyllospadix average canopy height
● Patchiness of Phyllospadix spp. cover
● Surfgrass epiphyte cover
● Mobile invertebrate diversity within Phyllospadix spp. bed

Set up
One permanent surfgrass transect per site is marked by 2 stainless steel bolts at either
end of a 10m transect. Lay 10m transect tape (refer to site maps to denote 0m bolt at
each site).

Motile Invertebrates
1. Place 25cm x 25cm unstrung quadrat on right side of transect at 1.5m mark.
2. Estimate % cover of Phyllospadix spp.within 25cm x 25cm quadrat
3. Identify and count all mobile invertebrates within 25cm x 25cm quadrat.
4. Record presence/absence (P/A) for colonial invertebrates.
5. Continue steps 1-3 for a total of 5 quadrats along the 10m transect. Prioritize

sampling the 5 quadrats on the right side of the 10m transect (1.5m, 3.5m, 5.5m,
7.5m, 9.5m). If surfgrass cover within quadrat is less than 50%, sample next

23



surfgrass quadrat on left and note on datasheet. (Eg. move to left at 2.5m if right
at 1.5m contains <50% surfgrass). A total of 5 quadrats must be sampled.

Notes:
If fewer than 5 quadrats on the left and the right contain >50% surfgrass cover,
randomly select additional quadrat locations on the transect.

To randomly select a distance on the transect, refer to the milliseconds display on
a digital watch. Pause the watch to determine the meter mark. Pause the watch a
second time to determine the decimeter mark. Pause the watch a third time to
determine the centimeter mark. Pause the watch a fourth time to determine
whether the quadrat will be placed on the left or right side of the transect. If an
even number is selected, choose the right side. If an odd number is selected,
choose the left side.

Length and Density
1. Place 25cm x 25cm strung quadrat on left side of transect at 0.5m mark.
2. Determine Phyllospadix species (P. torreyi , P. scouleri), count number of shoots

and record number of flowering shoots in 12.5cm x 12.5cm subplot (lower
corner closest to transect; see diagram). *If shoot density in 12.5cm x 12.5cm
subplot is very dense, subsampling further is an option. Make sure this is
recorded on the datasheet!

3. Using retractable tape measure, record average canopy height (height at which
shoots taper off) of all shoots measured.

4. If present, record epiphyte species and epiphyte species percent cover.
5. Alternating sides at one meter intervals, repeat steps 1-4.

Distances: 0.5m (L), 1.5m(R), 2.5m(L), 3.5m(R), 4.5m(L), 5.5m(R), 6.5m(L),
7.5m(R), 8.5m(L), 9.5m(R) (total 10 quadrats)

Notes:
At 1.5m(R), 3.5m(R), 5.5m(R), 7.5m(R) and 9.5m(R), complete invertebrate
diversity protocol prior to surfgrass bed dynamics protocol. Mobile invertebrates
flee from quadrat area in response to disturbance caused by counting and
measuring shoots.
Record 0 if no surfgrass observed in a quadrat.

24



Diagram 1. Surfgrass transect survey design. Along 10m transect, 25cm x 25cm
quadrat is placed every meter on alternating sides of the transect line. Surfgrass bed
dynamics are monitored within 12.5cm x 12.5cm subplot (red).

25



Seastar and Macroinvertebrate Dynamics: Swaths

Research Objectives:
Is the abundance and size of Pisaster ochraceous changing over time?
Is the incidence of seastar wasting disease changing over time?
Is the abundance and size of Katharina tunicata changing over time?
Are the abundance and sizes of other large invertebrates changing over time?

Equipment
50 m transect (x7)
15 cm rulers (1 per technician)
Clipboard
Pencil
Datasheet
Lumber chalk
Camera
Clickers (x3)

Parameters
● Pisaster ochraceous counts, size distribution (from radius measurements) and

disease status (wasting disease category according to the UCSC classification
system)

● Katharina tunicata counts and size distribution
● Counts and sizes of other large invertebrates (other sea star species, urchins,

Cryptochiton stelleri)

Set Up
At each site, 6 bolts have been permanently drilled into the rock to delineate three 30m
horizontal transect lines in the high, mid and low intertidal zones. At Fifth Beach and
North Beach, these are the bolts originally drilled for the Martone Lab annual
monitoring. Two bolts have been drilled at an approximate distance of 30m in each
zone. Refer to maps and coordinates to locate bolts.

1. Lay 3 transects horizontally through the two bolts in each zone.
2. Lay 4 transects vertically from the high zone transect line to the water line

at 0m, 10m, 20m and 30m. The area between the low zone transect line
and the water line will be searched even though the low zone bolts have
been drilled above the water line (at approximately 1.0m). In order to

26



maximize sampling area, search the lower intertidal zone at the time of
low tide.

By creating a grid, the area searched can be divided into subplots so that technicians
can be assigned a set search area. The area searched will change with respect to the
low tide levels during the day of the survey, however the counts of invertebrates/m2 can
be extrapolated using the bolt locations and the low tide height at the time of the survey.

Figure 9. Diagram of P. ochraceous and K. tunicata swath set up. Grey area indicates K.
tunicata search area. Searching for all target species will continue above high zone
transect line and below low zone transect line to water line within 30m swath.

27



Figure 10. Sea star swath elevation maps of Fifth Beach, North Beach and West Beach.

28



1. Search within the plot parameter for ochre stars. Assign technicians a set search
area. In order to maximize sampling area, search the lower intertidal zone at the
time of low tide. Measure the first 100 encountered individuals (includes juveniles
and adults for a total of 100 measurements). Measure size to the nearest 10mm
from the center of the disc to the tip of the longest ray. Sizes may be estimated if
sea stars are wedged in crevices with rays curved.

2. Record the corresponding disease category (0-4) for each individual (refer to
UCSC Wasting Disease Categories). Technicians are encouraged to mark the
substrate next to (not on- to avoid potential for spreading disease) the sea star
with lumber chalk to ensure individuals are not measured twice. Sea stars should
never be “straightened” or removed from the rock.

3. After 100 individuals have been measured, count the remainder of the ochre
stars within the plot parameter. Technicians are encouraged to use clickers.
Record adults and juveniles separately. Continue to record corresponding
disease categories for all individuals.

Adults = center of the disc to the tip of the longest ray is greater than
30mm
Juveniles = center of the disc to the tip of the longest ray is less than
30mm

4. Measure all  (to a maximum of 30 per species) other large invertebrates. This
includes gumboot chitons (Cryptochiton stelleri), Northern Abalone (Haliotis
kamtschatkana), urchins and other sea stars (eg. Henricia spp., Dermasterias
spp., Leptasterias spp. and any other species observed). Measure other sea
stars from the center of the disc to the tip of the longest ray. Measure chitons and
abalone lengthwise from tip to tip. Measure test diameter of urchins.

5. Report all measurements to the recorder.

Leather Chiton Dynamics: Swaths
1. Within the middle 10m segment of the plot parameter (see Figure 9), measure 50

leather chitons (Katharina tunicata).
2. Count all remaining leather chitons within the 10m subplot and report counts to

the recorder. To avoid counting individuals twice, individuals can be marked
directly with lumber chalk. Technicians are encouraged to use clickers.

29



Mussel Growth Experiment
Adapted from: PISCO Intertidal, Oregon State University

Research Objectives:
Are Mytilus californianus growth rates changing spatially or seasonally?

Equipment (for set up)
Wood file or dremel
Vexar mesh
Zip ties
Hammer drill
Bolts (8 per replicate)
Safety glasses

Set Up
Outplant mussels at rocky intertidal sites around Calvert Island to monitor their growth
seasonally and yearly. Mussels are initially strapped to the rock with Vexar cages to
encourage byssal attachment. Vexar cages are slowly removed following mussel
attachment. Select experiment locations on sections of bare rock placed within the
middle of the mussel bed vertical extent at the site (half way between the upper and
lower limit of the mussel bed). For each replicate, install 8 bolts in order to attach a
rectangular piece of Vexar mesh (approximately 30cm x 30cm). To monitor yearly and
seasonal mussel growth outplants will be reset annually in October.

Winter replicates (n=3): Begin protocol in October. Mussels will grow for 6 months over
winter.
Summer replicates (n=3): Begin protocol in April. Mussels will grow for 6 months over
summer.

Mussel Collections
1. Collect 50 mussels between 4-5 cm in total length. Attempt to limit collections to

the middle range of the mussel bed.
2. Using a wood file or dremel, notch each mussel along the top of the shell (where

the shell meets, opposite from the umbo). Example here is showing the notch
after several weeks/months of growth, initial notch will be in the same location,
but at the edge of the shell..

30



3. On bare rock approximately mid-mussel band, drill bolt holes for 3 plots to secure
the Vexar mesh that will cover the mussels (see below). Make sure that the mesh
is secure to prevent the mussels from falling out, but that it is loose enough to
allow them to grow.

4. After approximately 4 weeks, loosen the vexar mesh by a few centimetres to
encourage the mussels to attach more byssal threads and to allow them to grow
more.

5. After approximately 8 weeks, check if the mussels are securely attached. If they
are, remove the Vexar mesh. If they are not, return in one week.

6. After approximately 6 months, collect 25 mussels (or half of the surviving
mussels) from each plot and store them in a freezer @ -20°C. Leave the
remaining 25 mussels (or other half of the surviving mussels) to grow for another
6 months.

7. Repeat steps 1-3 for the next treatment.
8. Repeat steps 3-4 for the three new plots.
9. At 12 months from initial outplant collect remaining mussels of the first treatment

as well as 25 mussels from each plot of the second treatment. Restart the yearly
outplant by restarting at step 1.

31



Lab processing

Equipment
Gloves
Lab coat
Calipers
Scalpel
Forceps
Tray
Aluminum tins (10 per replicate)
Pencil
Data sheet

Monitoring parameters
● Mussel measurements: total length, initial length, perisoticum lip length, girth,

height
● Mussel gonad development and sex
● Mussel total wet tissue weight, dry tissue weight and shell weight

Lab Processing
1. Remove a bag containing a repliate of mussels (n=25 or less depending on

survival rates) from the freezer and allow them to thaw.
2. Select a mussel and record the sample ID, site, deployment date (when mussel

was notched), collection date, lab processing date, duration of experiment and
season.

3. Scrape off any barnacles on the mussel shell with a scalpel and carefully pull off
the byssal threads.

4. Using calipers, measure the total length (bottom to top; longest length), initial
length (bottom to top of notch), Perisoticum lip (bottom to the black), girth
(distance from side to side of shell, in line with the umbo), height (distance from
ventral side to tallest part on dorsal side) of the mussel shell to the nearest tenth
of a mm. Refer to mussel measurements images below.

Note: The growth of the mussel will be calculated in excel by subtracting
the initial length of the mussel shell by the total length of the shell.

5. Cut open the mussel by slicing through the adductor muscle. Place it open side
down on the tray, and allow any liquid to drain out.

32



6. Record sex category. See Gonad Color Scoring below and record category.
1=creamy white
2=white to peach-ish to orange-ish
3=dark orange

7. Record gonad development category.
0 = no gonad visible
1 = small gonad
2 = larger gonad confined to visceral mass
3 = large gonad extending into mantle cavity

8. Record the total wet weight of the mussel in grams – to the nearest hundredth
of a gram.

9. Record the weights of aluminum tins.
10.Place the wet tissue in a pre-weighed aluminum tin and record the wet tissue

weight (tin weight + wet tissue weight).
11. Record the shell weight to the nearest hundredth of a gram.
12.Repeat step 10-11 for all mussels.
13.Record the weight of the shell for all mussels in each replicate to the nearest

hundredth of a gram.
14.Place aluminum tins with wet tissue in drying oven at 60°C.
15.After a minimum of three days in the drying oven, record the dry weight of the

soft tissues. Be sure that all tissue is crispy.

Mussel Measurements Gonad Color Scoring

Mussel growth with notch

33



Surface Water Grab Samples

Field Protocols

YSI Measurements

Equipment
Calibrated YSI unit
Field Cover Sheet

Monitoring parameters
● Temperature (°C), specific conductivity, salinity and pH measurements

1. Calibrate the YSI in the lab before going to the study site.
2. At each site, submerge the YSI probe in the seawater near the surface. Allow

readings to stabilize.
3. Record: time, temperature (°C), specific conductivity, salinity, pH

Water collection

Equipment
Weighted carboy and line
500mL brown Nalgene bottles (x3)
Nitrile gloves

Monitoring parameters
● do13C, nutrients, chlorophyll

1. Wearing nitrile gloves, deploy the weighted carboy from the shore and allow it to
fill with seawater.

2. Using the attached line, bring the carboy back to the shore.
3. Using the water spigot, rinse one brown 500mL Nalgene 3 times. Fill it

completely with the remaining seawater in the carboy.
4. Continue steps 1-3 for a total of 3 replicates.

Note: Samples should be processed upon returning to the lab, or within 2 hours from
time sampled (see lab protocol).

34



Lab Protocols

Complete ‘Marine Lab’ iPad form with hyper nearshore water sample filtering lab
protocol.

Processing surface water grab samples

Equipment
Gloves
Peristaltic pump
Flat forceps
60mL syringe
250ml beaker
Squeeze bottle of ethanol
Squeeze bottle of DI water
Filter tips (3 per site)
Non-combusted 47mm GFF filters
3um filters
20um filters
Mesh separators
Petri dish (x2)
Black ziplock bag
Stickers with UIDs (per site: DO13C x3, nutrients x1, Chl a x2)
Blank sticker labels
Falcon tubes (14mL) (3x per site)
Amber borosilicate glass vials (40mL) (3x per site)
Kimwipes
Permanent marker
Safety Glasses (for acidifying DO13C)
Lab Coat (for acidifying DO13C)
50mL beaker (x2) (for acidifying DO13C)
Pipette and tip (for acidifying DO13C)
Waste acid container (for acidifying DO13C)
6M HCL (for acidifying DO13C)

35



Pre-labelling stickers
1. Sheets of stickers containing UIDs have been pre-printed for each sample type:

nutrients, DO13C and Chl a.
2. For each site, pre-label 3 amber borosilicate glass vials (40mL) for DO13C

(bottles 1, 2 and 3), 1 falcon tube for nutrients (bottle 1 only) and 6 falcon tubes
for Chl a (bottles 1 and 2; 3 filter size fractions). Pre-printed labels contain
sample type, UID, and marine (M) or freshwater (F) designation. Chlorophyll a
labels also contain filter size fraction. With a permanent marker, circle GFF on 2
falcon tubes, 3um on 2 falcon tubes and 20um on 2 falcon tubes.

3. On blank sticker labels, write site code, date and bottle number and place on all
bottles and falcon tubes. See below for samples size and replicates per site.

4. Each amber borosilicate glass vials (40mL) and falcon tube should be labelled
with sample type, UID, filter size fraction, site code, date and bottle number.

Sample sizes and replicates per site:
DO13C: n=3
Nutrients: n=1
Chl a: n=2
YSI: n=1

Bottle 1: Bottle 2: Bottle 3:
DO13C: n=1 DO13C: n=1 DO13C: n=1
Chl a: n=1 (GFF, 3um, 20um) Chl a: n=1 (GFF, 3um, 20um)
Nutrients: n=1

Filtering nutrients
1. Wearing gloves, rinse a 60mL syringe 3 times with DI water.
2. Attach a filter tip and rinse the 60mL syringe 3 times with seawater from bottle 1.
3. Fill the 60mL syringe with seawater from bottle 1.
4. Filter ~10mL of the seawater into the sink to clean out the filter tip.
5. Rinse a pre-labelled nutrient falcon tube 3 times with the filtered seawater in the

syringe.
6. Fill the falcon tube to 13 mL with the filtered seawater from the syringe.
7. Store the falcon tube in the chest freezer in the Griswald Lab.

Filtering DO13C
1. Wearing gloves, rinse a 60mL syringe 3 times with DI water.
2. Attach a filter tip and rinse the 60mL syringe 3 times with seawater from bottle 1.
3. Fill the 60mL syringe with seawater from bottle 1.
4. Filter ~10mL of the seawater into the sink to clean out the filter tip.
5. Rinse a pre-labelled DO13C amber borosilicate glass vial 3 times with the filtered

seawater in the syringe.

36



6. Fill the amber borosilicate glass vial to the bottleneck with the filtered seawater
from the syringe.

7. Repeat steps 1-6 for bottles 2 and 3.
8. Acidify samples immediately.

Acidifying DO13C
1. Wearing gloves, safety glasses and a lab coat, turn on the fume hood in the

Britco Lab.
2. Fill an acid waste container with fresh water (there is likely already an acid waste

container in the fume hood. This is diluted and emptied regularly by techs from
other programs that use the lab more frequently).

3. Pour ~20 mL of DI water into a 50mL beaker and place it in the fume hood.
4. In the fume hood, pour a very small amount (~1mL) of 6M HCL into a 50mL

beaker. Any unused acid cannot be poured back into the acid bottle, so be
conservative.

5. At the fume hood, remove sample lids. Be sure that lids are organized so that
they go back on the same bottle.

6. Select the appropriate pipette and pipette tip in order to add 200 μL of 6M HCL.
7. Carefully pipette 200 μL of 6M HCL into each sample. As long as the pipette tip

does not touch sample water, the same pipette tip can be used for all 3
DO13C samples.

8. Replace the sample lids and invert the samples to mix the acid.
9. Rinse the acid tip by pipetting DI water and eject it into the waste acid container 3

times.
10.Eject the used tip into the “Rinsed acid tips” container in the fume hood.
11. Pour unused acid in the 50 mL beaker into the waste acid bucket. Rinse the

beaker with DI water.
12.Mark the DO13C labels with an “A” (for acidified) with a permanent marker and

store them in the Griswald fridge.

Filtering chlorophyll
1. Wearing gloves, turn on peristaltic pump and rinse filter cups and filter holder with

DI water 3 times. Turn off pump.
2. Using clean forceps, place a GFF filter on bottom of the peristaltic pump,

followed by a mesh separator in the center of the filter. Place a 3um filter on top
of the mesh spacer (shiny side up). Place a mesh spacer in the center of the 3um
filter. Place a 20um filter on top of the mesh spacer (shiny side up).

3. Carefully screw the filter cup onto the pump, preventing the formation of wrinkles
or air bubbles on the filters.

4. Measure 250mL of seawater from Nalgene bottle 1 into a 250mL beaker.
5. Turn on the pump (pressure should not exceed -5 Hg). Pour the 250mL of

seawater into the filter cup. Open the filter funnel valve. Avoid letting the filter
run dry- this will cause phytoplankton cells to rupture.

37



6. When filtering is complete, close the filter funnel valve. Carefully unscrew and
remove the filter funnel cup.

7. Using flat forceps, roll up the 20um filter (on top). The filter should be rolled up
like a burrito with the contents of the sample on the inside. Avoid touching the
center of the filters with the forceps, only the edges.

8. Place the rolled up filter in a pre-labelled falcon tube. Make sure it is below the
10mL marking on the falcon tube. Place falcon tube into a black ziplock bag.
Label bag with site code, date and bottle number.

9. Remove the mesh separator. Place it in petri dish and spray with ethanol until it is
covered. Move the mesh separator to another Petri dish and rinse with DI water.

10.Using flat forceps, roll up the 3um filter (in middle). Repeat steps 7-9 with the
3um filter and the mesh separator.

11. Using flat forceps, roll up the GFF filter (on bottom). Repeat steps 7-8 with the
GFF filter.

12.Screw on filter cup and repeat steps 1-11 with Nalgene bottle 2.
13.The two black ziplock bags containing 3 falcons tubes from bottle 1 and 3 falcon

tubes from bottle 2 should be stored in the -80°C freezer in the Britco Lab.

38



Appendix

Appendix A. Data Sheets

Appendix A1. Field Cover Sheet

39



Appendix A2. Point Intercept Plot Survey Data Sheet

40



41



Appendix A3. Motile Invertebrates: Biodiversity Data Sheet

42



Appendix A4. Mussel Dynamics: Length and Bed Depth Data Sheet

43



Appendix A5. Surfgrass Community Structure: Motile Invertebrate Data Sheet

44



Appendix A6. Surfgrass Community Structure: Length and Density Data Sheet

45



Appendix A7. Seastar and Macroinvertebrate Swath Data Sheet

46



47



Appendix A8. Leather Chiton Swath Data Sheet

48



Appendix B. Invertebrate Species List

Arthropoda

Amphipoda Pagurus hirsutiusculus

Balanus glandula Pagurus spp.

Caprellidae Petrolisthes cinctipes

Chthamalus dalli Petrolisthes spp.

Hemigrapsus nudus Pollicipes polymerus

Idotea spp. Porcellanidae

Oedignathus inermis Pugettia gracilis

Pachycheles rudis Pugettia producta

Pachygrapsus crassipes Pugettia richii

Pagurus beringanus Pugettia spp.

Pagurus granosimanus Semibalanus cariosus

Pagurus hemphili

Chordata

Aplidium solidum Styela spp.

Tunicata

Cnidaria

Abietinaria greenei Anthopleura xanthogrammica

Actiniara Holothuroidia

Anthopleura  elegantissima Hydrozoa

49



Echinodermata

Cucumaria spp. Mesocentrotus franciscanus

Dermasterias imbricata Pisaster ochraceus

Echinoidea Pseudocnus spp.

Evasterias troschelii Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis

Henricia pumila Strongylocentrotus pallidus

Henricia spp. Strongylocentrotus purpuratus

Leptasterias hexactis Strongylocentrotus spp.

Leptasterias spp.

Mollusca

Acmaea mitra Diodora aspera

Alia carinata Hermissenda crassicornis

Alia spp. Homalopoma spp.

Amphissa spp. Katharina tunicata

Amphissa versicolor Lacuna spp.
Anomiidae Lepidochitona dentiens

Bittium eschrichtii Lepidochitona spp.

Calliostoma canaliculatum Lepidozona spp.

Calliostoma spp. Leukoma staminea

Ceratostoma nuttali Littorina plena

Crasssodoma gigantea Littorina scutulata

Crepidula spp. Littorina sitkana

Cryptochiton stellerii Littorina spp.

50



Lottia digitalis Nucella lamellosa

Lottia paradigitalis Nucella ostrina

Lottia pelta Nucella spp.

Lottia scutum Nudibranchia

Lottia spp. Onchidella borealis

Mopalia spp. Polyplacophora

Mytilus californianus Searlesia dira
Mytilus spp. Tegula funebralis

Mytilus trossulus Tegula pulligo

Nucella canalicuta Tonicella spp.

Annelida

Nemertea

Platyhelminthes

Polychaeta

Spirorbis spp.

Bryozoa

Porifera

Haliclona permollis

51



Appendix C. Macroalgae Species List

Chlorophyta

Codium fragile

Ulva spp.

Rhodophyta

Ahnfeltia fastigiata Microcladia borealis

Bangiaceae Neorhodomela larix

Callithamnion pikeanum Odonthallia floccosa

Cryptosiphonia woodii Odonthallia spp.

Dilsea spp. Plocamium spp.

Gloiopeltis furcata Polysiphonia spp.

Halosaccion glandiforme Prionitis spp.

Hildenbrandia spp. Pterosiphonia spp.

Mastocarpus spp. Ptilota spp.

Mazzaella spp. Smithora naiadum

Melobesia mediocris Wildemania norrisii

52



Appendix D. UCSC Wasting Disease Categories

Category 1
Lesion(s) on 1 arm or body tissue degradation in some of these photos may be the
result of multiple lesions merging, but it is restricted to a single arm, or single location on
the oral disk.

53



Category 2
Lesions on 2 arms or 1 arm and body, deteriorating arm(s).

Category 3
Lesions on most of body, 1-2 arms missing.

54



Category 4
Severe tissue deterioration/death >/= 3 missing arms

55



References

Denny, M. W. “Life in the maelstrom: The biomechanics of wave-swept rocky shores.”
Trends in Ecology and Evolution 2.3 (1987): 61-66.

Dias, M., Roma, J., Fonseca, C., Pinto, M., Cabral, H. N., Silva A., Vinagre, C. “Intertidal
pools as alternative nursery habitats for coastal fishes.” Marine Biology Research 12:4
(2016): 331-344.

Johnson, M. E.  "Why Are Ancient Rocky Shores so Uncommon?" The Journal of
Geology 96.4 (1988): 469-480.

Harley, C. D. G. “Climate Change, Keystone Predation, and Biodiversity Loss.” Science
334.6059 (2011): 1124-1127.

Helmuth, B., Harley, C. D. G., Halpin, P.M., O’Donnell, M., Hofmann, G. E., Blanchette,
C. A. “Climate Change and Latitudinal Patterns of Intertidal Thermal Stress.” Science
298.5595 (2002): 1015-1017.

Marsh, C.P. “Rocky intertidal community organization: the impact of avian predators on
mussel recruitment.” Ecology 67 (1986): 771–786.

Rilov, G., and D.R. Schiel. “Trophic linkages across seascapes: subtidal predators limit
effective mussel recruitment in rocky intertidal communities.” Marine Ecology Progress
Series 327 (2006): 83-93.

56