Assessing Tropical Marine 
Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific 

Island Resource Managers 

Coastal Fisheries Science and Management Section
Secretariat of the Pacific Community

by

Kalo Pakoa, Kim Friedman, Bradley Moore, Emmanuel Tardy and Ian Bertram

This publication has been produced with the assistance of the European Union.

The contents of this publication are the sole responsability of the Secretariat of the 
Pacific Community and can in no way be taken to reflect the views 

of the European Union.



©Copyright Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) 2014

All rights for commercial / for profit reproduction or translation, in any form, reserved. SPC authorises the 
partial reproduction or translation of this material for scientific, educational or research purposes, provided 

that SPC and the source document are properly acknowledged. Permission to reproduce the document 
and/or translate in whole, in any form, whether for commercial / for profit or non-profit purposes, must be 
requested in writing. Original SPC artwork may not be altered or separately published without permission.

Original text: English

Secretariat of the Pacific Community Cataloguing-in-publication data

Pakoa, Kalo

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers / by Kalo Pakoa, Kim 
Friedman, Bradley Moore, Emmanuel Tardy and Ian Bertram

1. Sea cucumbers — Oceania.
2. Marine resources — Oceania.
3. Marine invertebrates — Oceania.

I. Pakoa, Kalo II. Friedman, Kim J. III. Moore, Bradley, IV. Tardy, Emmanuel, V. Bertram, Ian
VI. Title VII. Secretariat of the Pacific Community

593.960995	 AACR2

ISBN: 978-982-00-0712-3

Secretariat of the Pacific Community
Coastal Fisheries Programme

BP D5, 98848 Noumea Cedex, New Caledonia
Tel: +687 26 20 00
Fax: +687 26 38 18

Email: spc@spc.int; http://www.spc.int/

Prepared for publication and printed at
Secretariat of the Pacific Community headquarters

Noumea, New Caledonia, 2014

Cover images: Matthieu Juncker (Front cover and Birgus latro), Kalo Pakoa (Turbo marmoratus) and 
Emmanuel Tardy (Actinopyga mauritiana)

2 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Acknowledgements

The Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) gratefully 
acknowledges the funding support provided by the European 
Union for implementing the Scientific Support for the 
Management of Coastal and Oceanic Fisheries in the Pacific 
Islands region project (SciCOFish, coastal component), and 
for the finalisation and printing of this manual. The original 
draft of this manual was produced under the coastal component of the 
Pacific Regional Oceanic and Coastal Fisheries Development Programme 
(PROCFish/C), which was also funded by the European Union.

SPC also acknowledges the other persons who assisted with drafting and 
commenting on the text, and in particular Mr Ferral Lasi, invertebrate 
scientist with the PROCFish project, Mr Franck Magron, SPC Reef 
Fisheries Information Manager, Dr David Fisk, consultant and Mr 
Lindsay Chapman, SPC Coastal Fisheries Programme Manager. SPC also 
acknowledges the participation of all communities in the Pacific Islands 
who were involved in implementing these techniques.

SPC also thanks Ms Youngmi Choi for laying out the publication and 
producing the illustrations, Mr Boris Colas for designing the cover, 
Ms Céline Barré for proof reading; and Ms Kim Des Rochers, freelance 
editor, for editing the final draft.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 3



Abbreviations
CI	 confidence interval
cm	 centimetre(s)
COTS	 crown-of-thorns starfish
CPUE	 catch per unit of effort
DWSs	 deepwater timed scuba search
EIA	 environmental impact assessment
g	 gram(s)
GIS	 geographic information system
GPS	 global positioning system
ha	 hectare(s)
ind.	 indivivual(s)
kg	 kilogram(s)
km	 kilometre(s)
km2	 square kilometre(s)
m	 metre(s)
min.	 minute(s)
mm	 millimetre(s)
MOPt	 mother-of-pearl transect
MPA	 marine protected area
PICTs	 Pacific Island countries and territories
RBt	 reef benthos transect
RFID	 Reef Fisheries Integrated Database
RFs	 reef-front timed swim
RFw	 reef-front timed walk
LNs	 lobster night search
SBt	 soft benthos transect
SE	 standard error
STD	 standard deviation
SCNs	 sea cucumber night search
scuba	 self-contained underwater breathing apparatus
SiQ	 soft infaunal quadrat
SPC	 Secretariat of the Pacific Community
SWSt	 shallow water scuba transect
SWSs	 shallow-water timed scuba search
WPT	 waypoint

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 4



Table of contents
1.	 Introduction	 7
	 1.1	 Resource surveys as part of fisheries management	 7
	 1.2	 Purpose of this manual	 8
	 1.3	 How this manual is organised	 8
2.	 Planning and designing an invertebrate survey	 9
	 2.1	 What are resource surveys and why do them?	 9
	 2.2	 What kinds of questions can resource surveys answer?	 9
	 2.3	 What and who is the survey for?	 9
	 2.4	 Planning a survey	 10
	 2.5	 The basis of survey design	 10
	 2.6	 Logistical planning of surveys	 14
3.	 Survey techniques and methodologies	 17
	 3.1	 Distribution of surveys across a typical reef system	 17
	 3.2	  Broad-scale survey techniques	 18
	 3.3	 Fine-scale survey techniques	 25
	 3.4	 Quality of information from each survey technique	 29
	 3.5	 Time estimates and costs associated with conducting a survey	 31
4.	 Data entry and analysis to answer management questions	 33
	 4.1	 Data entry and quality control	 33
	 4.2	 Analysis of stock status indicators	 34
	 4.3	 Data communication	 45
5.	 Further readings	 47
6.	 Appendices	 49

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 5



Table of contents

Appendices List of Tables
1.	 Measuring sizes of various 1.	 Survey methods and the quality of 

macroinvertebrates	 49 information generated by each.	 30
2.	 Safety during in-water surveys	 53 2.	 Species detected by method and habitat 
3.	 Species identification guides	 57 type (based on hypothetical data).	 35
4.	 Species of interest and assessing  3.	 Species presence and ranking by number 

species not targeted by the Secretariat of individuals observed for a sea cucumber 
of the Pacific Community surveys	 73 fishery (based on hypothetical data).	 35

5.	 Field survey datasheets	 103 4.	 The standard and estimated area 
6.	 Estimates of time, equipment and covered by each survey technique.	 38

personnel required by survey method	 107 5.	 Mean density for reef benthos transect 
7.	 Data analysis using Microsoft Excel	 109 surveys (density values are in number 

hectare-1).	 39
8.	 Conversion ratio for length and weight 

of live and dried sea cucumber products 6.	 Pacific regional reference densities for 
and dry pieces per kilogram	 117 healthy sea cucumber stocks (Pacific 

dataset).	 41

List of Figures
1.	 A survey design should include a  

reasonable number of replications per 15.	 Actinopyga mauritiana distribution profile 
station, and should be consistent with the in a complex reef system.	 36
Reef Fisheries Integrated Database.	 11 16.	 Relative density of Actinopyga mauritiana 

2.	 Typical types of invertebrate surveys by depth. 	 37
conducted on a complex reef system.	 17 17.	 Distribution of Bohadschia argus described 

3.	 Legend for survey methodologies in the by density measures from survey stations 
following diagrams.	 18 across an island in the Pacific.	 37

4.	 Manta tow survey technique. 	 18 18.	 Mean density of sea cucumbers from soft 
5.	 Reef-front timed swim (RFs).	 20 benthos transect surveys conducted at a 

Pacific Island site.	 40
6.	 Reef-front timed walk (RFw).	 21

19.	 Trochus size distribution for a Pacific 
7.	 Shallow-water timed scuba search (SWSs).	 22 Island site.	 42
8.	 Deepwater timed scuba search (DWSs).	 23 20.	 Mean size frequency of Holothuria scabra 
9.	 Sea cucumber night search (SCNs).	 24 within a marine protected area (n = 210) 
10.	 Reef benthos transect (RBt).	 25 and non-marine protected area (n = 46) 
11.	 Soft benthos transect (SBt).	 26 at a hypothetical site. 	 43

12.	 Shallow water scuba transect (SWSt).	 27
13.	 Soft infaunal quadrat (SiQ) survey.	 28
14.	 Standardised terminology for habitat 

descriptions used in this manual.	 36

6 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



1. Introduction
1.1	 Resource surveys as part of fisheries management

Although the Pacific Islands region is relatively free from the pressures of large-scale 
industrialised exploitation, marine biodiversity and species of importance for food 
security or commercialisation are under pressure from a combination of subsistence 
harvesting (where coastal populations are high), commercial fishing activity and coastal 
development. Although there are few documented cases of widespread collapses, a 
lack of understanding of the status of resources and the health of coastal systems is a 
recognised shortfall in the ability to manage stocks over time. Managing resources and 
habitat by way of day-to-day perceptions suffers from a constant shift in understanding 
with changing generations.

The various pressures on invertebrate resources must be understood in order to devise 
controls to maintain their productivity. This is critically important for maintaining 
food security, and ensuring the cultural integrity of Pacific Island peoples. Measurable 
‘yardsticks’ are needed to understand changes in the status of resources following 
periods of fishing or habitat change. As well, a quantitative understanding of stock 
recovery under active adaptive fisheries management regimes will allow greater insights 
into the affects of fishing and management.

Many invertebrate resource monitoring programmes introduced in the Pacific Islands 
region have not been sustainable because they are driven by project funding and so 
end when funding ceases. Many types of resource assessments have been introduced 
in Pacific Island countries and territories (PICTs) to assess the health of invertebrate 
resource stocks, including underwater visual census, mark-recapture, and catch per unit 
effort (CPUE) studies. These surveys are based on sampling a representative number of 
areas and using the data from previous surveys to make generalisations about the status 
of resource stock population by area, island or country using various statistical tools. 
The continuing problem with doing this, however, is that statistics can be complicated, 
daunting, and require considerable training and resources. In addition, surveys 
undertaken in the past have been designed separately, making it difficult to compare 
results to provide a broader understanding of resources status or to enable countries 
to share experiences and learn from each other. The lack of accurate information and 
expertise on invertebrate resource assessments is testament to the current lack of 
information on invertebrate resources and, thus, the need for effective and sustainable 
monitoring programmes to be established in PICTs. 

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 7



1. Introduction

Studies conducted by the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) since 2002 have sought to provide 
information to Pacific Island governments, administrations and communities to allow them to gauge the 
condition of reef and lagoon invertebrate fisheries, and to enable them to adopt relevant management 
measures, plans and regulations. The information from these studies has been used in the development of 
this manual.

1.2	 Purpose of this manual
This manual is designed for fisheries and environmental officers, and non-governmental partners who are 
tasked with assessing the state of fisheries resources and macroinvertebrate communities. Promoting the 
use of the standardised survey methodologies and analytical procedures presented in this manual allows 
survey results to be compared across different countries and/or regions, and ensures a broader geographical 
perspective on invertebrate resources. 

This manual adopts a simplistic approach by beginning with a clear management question, followed by a 
discussion of survey design and selection of fisheries-independent survey methodologies to use, and the basic 
analytical techniques for indicating stock health. This manual does not make suggestions on ‘how to manage’, 
but focuses on how to attain a useful and repeatable measure of resource stock condition for the sustainable 
management of invertebrate resources. 

The three main uses of this manual (described in greater detail in Section 2) are:

1.	 Estimating the status of stocks of certain fishery resources in order to provide management advice. 
2.	 Assessing the impact of development activities or a natural disaster (commonly referred to as an 

environmental impact assessment, or EIA).
3.	 Long-term monitoring to detect changes due to development, human habitation or environmental 

changes such as climate change.

1.3	 How this manual is organised
This manual consists of four sections plus support material in the appendices that provide:

•	  a guide on how to plan and design an invertebrate survey (Section 2); 

•	  detailed descriptions of a range of survey techniques that can be used (Section 3); and

•	  basic analytical techniques and interpretations of typical data recorded during the surveys (Section 4). 

The appendices give further details on measuring invertebrates (Appendix 1), safety precautions when 
undertaking field surveys (Appendix 2), species identification guides (Appendix 3) and regionally compiled 
data on species of interest to fisheries, including additional information on survey methods for species such 
as spiny lobster, coconut crabs, land crabs and octopus (Appendix 4). Appendix 5 contains field datasheet 
templates for the techniques described in this manual. Appendix 6 provides estimates of time, personnel 
numbers, and equipment required to complete various survey methodologies. Appendix 7 covers data analysis 
techniques for various types of survey data, with specific examples. Appendix 8 contains data for converting 
sea cucumber lengths to wet and dry weights.

8 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



2. Planning and 
designing an 
invertebrate survey

2.1	 What are resource surveys and why do them?

Invertebrate resource surveys collect information that helps to assess the status of 
resources and the condition of their habitats. Resource surveys can produce comprehensive 
information on the status of stocks (species diversity, abundance, size frequency), and 
make it possible to: 1) determine where resources are found; 2) assess the variation in the 
‘health’ of these resources among locations (e.g. fished and non-fished areas and/or areas 
under special management); and 3) provide an overall assessment of the stock across the 
whole fishery (when compared with other similar places and fishing areas). 

Repeated assessments of invertebrate resources (monitoring programmes) make it 
possible to determine changes in the status of a resource over time, starting from the 
first assessment (baseline). Such monitoring programmes require the use of standardised 
survey designs and methodologies, and a clear understanding of the indicators and 
thresholds to use to understand changes in the status of invertebrate resources. It is 
generally agreed that invertebrate populations are declining in most PICTs, and that 
reliable and comparable time-series datasets are needed. Standardised assessment 
protocols that use simple indicators for the status of invertebrate stocks will enable 
more effective stock assessments and management interventions that will ensure the 
sustainability of invertebrate resources.

2.2	 What kinds of questions can resource surveys answer?
Resource surveys gather information on the state of resources and how they change 
in response to stresses such as fishing, which is useful for fisheries managers and 
stakeholders. By monitoring invertebrate resources over time, changes in stock 
conditions including pressure on stocks can assist fisheries managers in determining 
sustainable fishing levels or assessing the effectiveness of management measures (e.g. 
closed areas or size limits). 

2.3	 What and who is the survey for?
Before beginning a survey, it is essential to be clear about what the information will be 
used for, and by whom. This will influence the type of surveys to be carried out, the 
range of data to be collected, and how the data should be analysed and presented. For 
example, if the intention is to provide a national assessment of a resource, then broad-
scale surveys are needed. However, if the aim is to inform communities about the status 
of their resources, finer-scale surveys are needed.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 9



2. Planning and designing an invertebrate survey

2.4	 Planning a survey
Monitoring the condition of a stock will not necessarily achieve a conservation or sustainable fishery outcome 
unless it is linked to an understanding of where in the biological cycle the resource is coming under pressure, 
and using that information to develop ways to manage (e.g. through fisheries controls) or circumvent that 
pressure, such as implementing temporal and spatial closures (e.g. habitat protection, offering alternative 
sources of food or income).

To make sure the intended surveys are clearly focused on the issue that needs to be addressed, it is important 
to spend time planning and designing the survey before any field work is started. With proper planning, it 
is possible to avoid spending time and resources conducting surveys that will not achieve the necessary 
outcomes.

The planning stage can be looked at as a series of questions that will, when answered thoroughly and carefully, 
help deliver what is needed for management based on the assessments.

The key questions in the planning procedure will make it possible to move through the general planning stage 
to more focused and detailed plans. The key questions that should be addressed in the planning phase are:

1.	 What are the questions that are being asked, and by whom? 
2.	 What are the key pieces of information needed to answer the questions?
3.	 What indicator datasets will provide a time-series to inform these decisions? 
4.	 What methods are most effective and efficient in providing this information?
5.	 Where and when is the best time to collect these data to ensure they are 

representative?
6.	 How are data going to be analysed and reported? 
7.	 When are the results and management advice (supported by the results) expected 

from the survey, and what timeline is required to get the job completed? 
8.	 Are skilled personnel available to conduct the survey and complete the reporting; if 

not, then what are the options?
9.	 Knowing the level of sampling effort and logistics required, is there sufficient funding 

to conduct the survey?

2.5	 The basis of survey design 
Resource surveys should be designed to ensure that ‘sufficient’ data are collected to inform management 
decisions. Invertebrate species may be highly aggregated in specific habitats, or evenly distributed over a 
reef system and among a number of different habitats and depths. A careful and well-planned survey design 
is important for capturing all potential habitats and typical characteristics of a species of interest in order to 
present a representative sample in a defined area. Many invertebrate species are of importance to fisheries for 
economic, subsistence and food security reasons; they are also important as indicators of ecological change 
in the marine environment. 

Survey points or stations are selected across the site of interest. A greater number of stations is needed for 
situations where there is less certainty about the distribution of stocks (e.g. for a baseline survey), and where 
stocks are widespread and/or in low abundance, and for larger scale surveys. The basic design (default) for 
surveying these points or survey ‘stations’ is to assess six standardised replicates per station for all survey 

10 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



2. Planning and designing and invertebrate survey

types (Fig. 1). This level of replication per station yields high quality data that are consistent with SPC’s Reef 
Fisheries Integrated Database (RFID) design, although in each case the number of stations to use in an area 
of interest can vary based on initial questions, survey time, the spatial area under consideration, and available 
resources.

Site
Station

1
Island

1 2 3 4 5 6
Replicate transects

Lagoon
Barrier

Figure 1. A survey design should include a reasonable number of replicate stations, and 
should be consistent with the Reef Fisheries Integrated Database.

In a first-time survey, broad-scale techniques should be employed to rapidly cover large distances prior to 
conducting a habitat-specific, fine-scale survey. The information generated from broad-scale surveys is most 
useful for providing a general overview of the distribution and relative abundance of widespread stocks, and in 
locating habitats and areas where there are higher densities of stocks of interest, which can later be surveyed 
through a precise, fine-scale survey (described in Section 3).

The following paragraphs provide a guide on how to design an invertebrate survey for the following three 
purposes: 1) estimating the status of stocks of certain fishery resources in order to provide management advice; 
2) assessing the impact of development activity or a natural disaster (i.e. an EIA); and 3) long-term monitoring 
to detect changes due to development, human habitation or environmental changes such as climate change.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 11



2. Planning and designing and invertebrate survey

1)	 A survey to estimate the status of stocks of certain fishery resources in order to provide 
management advice

Specific questions
The aim of this type of survey is to assess the status of an invertebrate stock, or to assess the 
effectiveness of current management decisions and suggest additional or improved management 
measures. The initial question should identify the resource of interest; for example, overall sea 
cucumber resources (all species) or specific species of sea cucumber. Once the resources have been 
identified, the next step is to determine which factors of the resources are of interest.

Information required to answer the question  
(which indicators will be measured through time?)

The purpose of this step is to define the type of data needed to answer the question. For example, for 
assessing the status of sea cucumber resources in an area, the following data are required:

Stock condition data Pressure data
•	 Density (number per •	 Size of representative •	 An indication •	 An indication of any 

unit of area with error areas (habitat types of the fishing recent (i.e. within 
terms) of sea cucumber and depths) to history of the last 5–10 years) 
species present in allow total counts of area of interest. major change in 
available representative individuals (by species) the habitat within 
areas (habitat types and to be calculated the area of interest 
depths) across the area (with error terms) that might have 
of interest. for both individual impacted the stock 

representative areas (e.g. major coral 
and the whole area of bleaching event, 
interest. fish kill, flood, 

•	 Species size or weight •	 Comparable data cyclone).
data to provide from the same area 
an indication of taken previously, or 
recruitment and stock comparable data from Management controls
maturity (information a different place with •	 An indication of any management 
on measuring similar habitats for controls that are in place (e.g. catch or 
invertebrates is found comparison of results. size limits, closed areas). 
in Appendix 1). 

2)	 A survey to assess the impact of a development activity or natural disaster 

Fisheries Departments throughout the Pacific Islands region are increasingly being asked to assist in conducting 
EIAs for macroinvertebrates for development projects. Changes in the abundance of important indicator 
species (also called sentinel or keystone species) can provide an indication of changes in habitat condition.

Coastal developments can have significant impacts on natural habitats and the invertebrate resources that 
inhabit them. For example, cutting a channel through a reef so that large vessels can gain access to a lagoon 
will result in changes in tidal circulation and wave patterns inside the lagoon. These changes can, in turn, 
affect water physicochemistry (temperature, salinity, ocean-terrestrial water exchange in the lagoon) and 
geomorphology (movement of sand around islands), which can further affect the suitability of the area for 
marine invertebrates. These changes may result in changes in habitat characteristics and a shift in invertebrate 
species composition due to different tolerance levels of individual species. Such changes might be immediately 

12 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



2. Planning and designing and invertebrate survey

obvious, but if they, say, affect larval retention in the lagoon (loss of invertebrate larvae from the lagoon to 
the open ocean), such changes may only become apparent when future generations of stocks are due to be 
fished (e.g. 5–10 years in the future). 

Specific questions
The aim of this type of survey is to assess the effects of acute short-term pressures on a subset 
of important macroinvertebrate species and their habitats. Determining the status of these factors 
before and after a development project makes it possible to identify any potential negative impacts, 
and facilitate the development of successful mitigation measures. In this instance, a large subset of 
important macroinvertebrate species and their habitats would be assessed in the area of impact and 
related areas. The next step would be to identify factors to be monitored.

Information required to answer the question  
(which indicators will be measured through time?)

The purpose of this step is to define the type of condition and pressure data that are needed to 
answer the question. In this case it is necessary to record the condition of the habitats that are at risk 
and a large subset of macroinvertebrate species that may be affected by the development project. In 
addition it is important to record the changes brought about by the development itself (the pressure). 
These condition and pressure factors need to be assessed before, during and after the development 
project, at sites directly impacted by the development, as well as a subset of sites removed from the 
impact of the development (called ‘control’ sites).

Habitat and stock condition data Pressure data
•	 Changes in habitats that •	 Differential changes in species •	 Measure differential 

are at direct risk from abundance (density) before changes through time 
the development project and after the development and across near and 
(e.g. declines in live coral from areas at direct risk from far sites related to the 
cover, seagrass density, the development compared pressure itself (e.g. 
increases in sand and with those distant from the increased sedimentation, 
rubble) compared with development. This could be changes in water current 
habitats distant from the a localised change with shifts speeds).
development. in the spatial distribution 

of aggregations and depth 
distributions of stocks across the 
area of interest or over the entire 
stock.

Management controls
•	 Changes in species- •	 Changes in biodiversity (e.g. new •	 Any management 

specific size-frequency species entering the site or lost controls put in place to 
data before and after from the site). mitigate the effects of 
development to the development project.
determine if there are 
shifts in recruitment or 
mortality of certain age 
groups as a result of the 
development project.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 13



2. Planning and designing and invertebrate survey

3)	 Long-term monitoring to detect changes due to development, human habitation or 
environmental changes such as climate change

Monitoring for longer term changes due to gradual, long-term chronic pressures such as population growth 
and climate change require a different focus than the above-mentioned examples, and data collection will 
be over a longer time period. In this situation, the effects of long-term, broad-scale impacts are informed 
by predictions from experts that highlight the most likely physicochemical pressures and related ecological 
impacts. This differs from the study of localised acute developments and will require the development of 
agreed upon monitoring frameworks across national and international boundaries to share information on 
both the impacts of these pressures and successful mitigation or adaptation measures.

Specific questions
The aim of this type of survey is to assess the impact of chronic pressures (e.g. increased fishing 
pressure due to population growth, temperature, ocean acidification and sea level increases) on 
marine habitats and invertebrate resources. To do so requires that the pressure that is suspected 
of being the main stressor be isolated, and that the factors that are susceptible to such changes 
be identified. In the case of increased population growth it is possible to monitor changes in the 
abundance and size of targeted invertebrates with increasing distance from the population centres. 
For climate change, increases in water temperature will directly impact some resources or have an 
indirect effect due to the decline or loss of habitats such as live corals, which provide a home and 
food for resource communities. This line of reasoning should be followed, with assistance from 
government, regional or research institutions, so that the most relevant indicators can be selected. 

Data required
Some water quality (e.g. temperature) and habitat parameters might be more important than others, 
as will information on the invertebrate stock that is being fished. It is important to work with national 
and international partners because such pressures are broad scale and commonly seen in many PICTs.

2.6	 Logistical planning of surveys 
Properly planning a survey will help clarify exactly what is needed to conduct successful fieldwork, how and 
where the work will be carried out, when the work will begin and end, and how to organise the budget, staff 
and movement of people and gear from place to place. Improper planning will incur excessive expenses, and 
result in transportation problems or inaccurate data, which waste time and money. Below are some of the 
important considerations when planning invertebrate surveys.

Understanding the survey site

Having background knowledge of the site of interest is important for good planning. Previous studies, reports, 
fisheries information, and experience with the site by people who have worked in the area are all important 
in the planning phase. Consulting available maps and charts is another important component in planning a 
survey. Consultation with local communities can greatly improve the background understanding of a site.

Timing 

When to undertake a survey is important, and should take into consideration a number of temporal factors, 
including season, time of day, moon phase and tide times. 

14 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



2. Planning and designing and invertebrate survey

Local community support

Fieldwork in PICTs is normally carried out in community-owned marine areas. Community acceptance and 
support are, therefore, essential to the success of field survey work. Communities must be fully informed 
and made aware of how they can be a part of, and benefit from, the activities undertaken. Some invertebrate 
species are habitat specific and local fishers have knowledge of species distribution in their area, therefore their 
input to the actual survey design and implementation in the field is invaluable. Local governing authorities such 
as local level government, island councils, provincial councils or state governments should be made aware of 
surveys in their respective areas. Communities in most areas like to know what the survey discovered in their 
areas, so planning should include a briefing to the community on preliminary survey findings. 

Safety considerations 

Safety is paramount at all times when working in coastal areas and at sea. In order to be most effective in 
the field, due consideration of the safety of all participants, as well as the boat and equipment is critically 
important. A safety instruction card (Appendix 2) provides more detailed information on safety issues to 
consider when conducting a resource survey. It is always necessary to have a survey team leader to take 
ultimate responsibility for decisions made, although all team members should be encouraged to contribute 
ideas in order that the best decisions are made. 

Species identification

A common problem with in-water field surveys is the misidentification of species. Before collecting data 
from surveys it is important to ensure that all surveyors are familiar with the species of interest. Training in 
invertebrate identification should include classroom exercises using photos, books and other available species 
guides, and in-water exercises while snorkelling. A species identification guide for commonly encountered 
invertebrate species in the Pacific Islands region is included as Appendix 3.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 15



16 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



3. Survey techniques 
and methodologies

3.1	 Distribution of surveys across a typical reef system
The distribution of invertebrates on a reef system varies greatly in spatial scale and with 
the topography and complexity of an ecosystem (e.g. high islands tend to have higher 
nutrient discharge to the coast than low-lying islands). On a regional scale, invertebrate 
diversity is partially determined by the location of the ecosystem in relation to the centre 
of biodiversity. In the Pacific Islands region, species diversity generally decreases from a 
hot spot in the west (near Palau) to less speciose islands in the east (French Polynesia). 
On an individual island, the more extensive and complex the reef system, the greater the 
variety of niches for flora and fauna and, the greater the number of invertebrate species. 

Basic knowledge of a reef system is essential in determining the location of sampling 
stations and assessing invertebrate resources. Figure 2 illustrates some typical types 
of surveys conducted on a complex reef system. Note that because coral reefs vary 
considerably in their structure, this illustration should be used only as a guide.

Figure 2. Typical types of invertebrate surveys conducted on a complex reef system.
(1) Manta tow assessment; (2) reef-front timed swim; (3) reef-front timed walk; 

(4) shallow-water timed scuba search; (5) deepwater timed scuba search; (6) night search; 
(7) reef benthos transect; (8) soft benthos transect; (9) shallow water scuba transect; 

(10) soft infaunal quadrat.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 17



3. Survey techniques and methodologies

This Section presents methodologies used to survey invertebrate species that are commonly of interest to 
Pacific Island fisheries, including sea cucumbers, clams, gastropods, and ‘pest’ species such as crown-of-thorns 
starfish (Acanthaster planci). Information on survey methodologies for additional species not targeted in these 
surveys, such as spiny lobsters, coconut crabs, marine and land crabs, and octopus are included in Appendix 4.

The survey protocols presented in this manual require 
surveyors to maintain standard methodologies to ensure Distance between surveyors
that data are comparable with the Pacific Islands dataset Search periods
maintained by SPC. The legend to the right (Fig. 3) has been 
developed to standardise the terminology in the diagrams Transect area

presented in this section. Distance between transects

Sample sheets for all of these standard invertebrate surveys Figure 3. Legend for survey methodologies 
are provided in Appendix 5. in the following diagrams.

3.2	 Broad-scale survey techniques
Manta tow

A manta tow is used to assess large sedentary invertebrates and habitats using a tow board technique adapted 
from English et al. (1997) (see Section 5). A surveyor holds on to the manta board, which is towed behind a 
boat that travels at low speeds of less than 2.5 km per hour (Fig. 4), equivalent to half the normal pace of a 
pedestrian walking.

Figure 4. Manta tow survey technique.

Manta tow stations are positioned along fringing reefs, lagoon patch reefs, and the back- and outer-reefs of 
barrier reefs. Manta tow surveys are conducted in depths of 1 to < 10 m of water but usually around 1.5–6 m, 
covering coral substrates and sand, and the edges of reefs. Manta tows should not be conducted in areas that 
are too shallow for an outboard powered boat (< 1 m), murky waters where visibility is poor, adjacent to wave 
impacted reefs (reef top) and over swells that can be dangerous.

Each transect covers a distance of 300 m (total of 6 transects = 1,800 m or 1.8 km) along reef contours and 
habitats of interest. The transect length is calibrated using the odometer function within the ‘trip computer’ 
option of a global positioning system (GPS) unit or an equivalent. Waypoints are recorded at the start and end 
of each transect to an accuracy of within 10 m, depending on the model of GPS used. The surveyor records the 
number of large sedentary invertebrates observed within a 2 m swath. 

Counts of observed invertebrates are made during the tow, and habitat observations are made at the end 
of each tow. A manta station comprising 6 manta tow replicates of 300 m length each, takes approximately 
1 hour (7–8 minutes x 6, plus recording and moving time between transects). Hand counters are used to assist 
with enumerating common species.

18 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



3. Survey techniques and methodologies

By passing more slowly over the benthos and concentrating on a narrower (2 m) swath of the benthos, greater 
care can be taken to obtain a reliable measure of invertebrate presence. Slower speeds maximise efficiency in 
spotting and identifying cryptic invertebrates, while still covering areas that are large enough to make accurate 
representative measures. 

OBJECTIVES EQUIPMENT
î	 Assess the range, abundance, size and condition î	 Boat with working engine

of invertebrate species and their habitat across î	 GPS to record start and end positions of transect
broad site scales (fringing reefs, lagoon patch 
reefs, back-reefs of barrier and outer reefs). î	 Manta tow board with pencil attached to a boat 

î using a 20 m-long rope
	 Generate a broader understanding of a reef 

system and its habitats, and provide guidance î	 Invertebrate data record sheet (Appendix 5a), 
on where to locate fine-scale assessments. specific manta data sheet to record transect 

î position from the GPS (Appendix 5b) and 
	 Provide a general understanding of the reef identification cards (Appendix 3) mounted on 

condition, such as live coral cover and/or coral manta tow board
bleaching. 

î	 Hand counter mounted on manta tow board
î	 Snorkelling gear, wetsuit and protective gloves

PERSONNEL
î	 A team of three people is the minimum number required, including a surveyor, a manta tow director who 

records GPS positions, and a skilful boat driver.

PROCEDURE
1.	 Locate where the manta tow survey will begin. Prior planning should help to point out where to conduct 

manta tows.
2.	 Mount the data record sheet on the manta board, and attach a pencil to the board using a string. 
3.	 Ensure the manta rope is attached to the boat. 
4.	 Follow the command of the manta tow director on the boat. He or she directs both the surveyor and 

skipper as to the start and end of each tow and where to go. The manta tow director is also in charge 
of the safety of the surveyor and should maintain visual contact with the surveyor at all times. The boat 
skipper is responsible for the safety of the boat and must coordinate with the manta tow director.

5.	 Conduct the manta tow survey along the flat or edge of a reef system. The manta tow director measures 
the distance (300 m) on the GPS using the ‘odometer’ function.

6.	 Stop the boat at the end of each tow so that the surveyor can record the habitat data for the completed 
manta tow replicate. The boat is then moved 10–20 m from the end position of the previous replicate, 
and in the general direction of the tows, before starting the next replicate. This ensures that the tows are 
not exactly contiguous but instead randomly placed. This is repeated until all 6 manta tows (replicates) 
have been completed for that station (see Fig. 1).

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 19



3. Survey techniques and methodologies

Reef-front timed swim WPT 
start

A reef-front timed swim (RFs) assesses the 
reef habitat along the reef front (where the 5–10 m 
waves reach the reef crest) when conditions 5 min.
are suitable (Fig. 5). 
Two surveyors conduct three 5-minute WPT 
searches (six 5-minute swims altogether or end

30 minutes in total) along exposed reef front 
edges where trochus (Tectus niloticus), green 
snails (Turbo marmoratus) and other species 
such as clams and surf redfish (Actinopyga 
mauritiana) are generally aggregated. Due 
to the dynamic conditions of the reef front, 
it is not generally possible to lay transects; 
however, the start and end positions of 
reef front searches can be recorded with a 
GPS. The distance that is swum or covered Figure 5. Reef-front timed swim (RFs). 
varies between stations depending on WPT = waypoint.
environmental conditions such as wind and 
currents. Habitat observations are made at 
the end of the search.

OBJECTIVE EQUIPMENT
î	 Assess the range and abundance of large î	 Boat with working engine

sedentary species such as trochus, green snails, î	 GPS to record start and end positions of station
clams and surf redfish inhabiting the reef crest, 
reef front and shallow outer reef zones. î	 Two stopwatches for timing, one per surveyor

î	 Two writing slates with pencil, one per surveyor 
î	 Invertebrate data record sheet (Appendix 5a) 

and identification cards (Appendix 3) mounted 
on slates

PERSONNEL î	 Snorkelling gear, wetsuit and protective gloves

î	 At least four people are required for this assessment: two surveyors, a boat skipper and an assistant. 
Surveyors should be fully equipped with a full body wetsuit, protective gloves, mask and snorkel. Note 
that a boat assistant is needed for this operation in order to assist surveyors and keep an eye on them so 
that the boat skipper can look after the boat.

PROCEDURE
1.	 Be aware of sea conditions and direction of the swim.
2.	 Record GPS positions at the start (when the surveyors get into the water) and at the end of the third 

5-minute swim. Each surveyor can keep their own time or one surveyor can record the time and 
communicate the start and end of each 5-minute search to the other surveyor. 

3.	 Two surveyors swim side-by-side (roughly 5–10 m apart) along the reef front behind the waves. Surveyors 
should keep a look out for each other. 

4.	 Each surveyor records the abundance (counts) of large sedentary species such as trochus, green snails, 
clams and surf redfish. 

5.	 Habitat observations are made at the end of the search.

20 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



3. Survey techniques and methodologies

Reef-front timed walk 

A reef-front timed walk (RFw) is WPT 
done by walking along the reef crest start

at low tide by two surveyors roughly 
5–10 m apart (Fig. 6). Each surveyor 
completes three 5-minute search- 5–10 m 
walks (15 minutes altogether, plus 5 min.
time for recording habitat data at the 
end of each 5-minute walk) along the WPT 

end
exposed reef crest where trochus 
(Tectus niloticus), turban snails (Turbo 
setosus), clams and surf redfish 
(Actinopyga mauritiana) are generally 
aggregated. On some atolls, greenfish 
(Stichopus chloronotus) and lollyfish 
(Holothuria atra) can also be found on 
the exposed reef flat. A GPS position 
is recorded at the start and end of 
each walk.

Figure 6. Reef-front timed walk (RFw). 
WPT = waypoint.

OBJECTIVE EQUIPMENT
î	 Assess the range and abundance of large î	 Boat with working engine

sedentary species such as trochus, turban î	 GPS to record start and end positions of replicate
snails, clams, surf redfish, greenfish and lollyfish 
aggregating on the reef crest. î	 Two stopwatches for timing, one per surveyor

î	 Two writing slates with pencil, one per surveyor
î	 Invertebrate data record sheet (Appendix 5a) 

and identification cards (Appendix 3) mounted 
on slates

î	 Surveyors should wear booties or boots with a 
strong sole, protective gloves and a hat

PERSONNEL
î	 At least three people are required for this assessment: two surveyors and a boat skipper for transport to 

and from the reef front. In some cases the surveyors do not need a boat driver to reach the reef.

PROCEDURE
1.	 Record GPS positions at the start and at the end of each 5-minute walk. One time keeper is best for this 

assessment.
2.	 Two surveyors walk side-by-side (roughly 5–10 m apart) along the reef crest.
3.	 Each surveyor enumerates all of the sedentary species observed, such as trochus, turban snails, clams, 

surf redfish, greenfish and lollyfish, and records them on the slate.
4.	 Habitat observations are made at the end of the search.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 21



3. Survey techniques and methodologies

Shallow-water timed scuba search 

A shallow-water timed scuba search (SWSs) (Fig. 7) is first conducted as a broad-scale assessment to look 
for locations where mother-of-pearl shells such as trochus, green snails and pearl oysters can be found in 
reasonable densities. The depth range for these assessments is usually 3–8 m and generally should not exceed 
12 m. Local knowledge of the area is important in order to be able to locate grounds where mother-of-pearl 
shells are generally found.

Two surveyors actively survey during three 5-minute searches (15 minutes for each diver, a total of 30 minutes). 
More than two individual mother-of-pearl shells found are considered to be sufficient to warrant a fine-scale 
assessment using shallow water scuba transects (SWSt). However, an SWSs should be completed before an 
SWSt is undertaken. 

WPT WPT 
start end

3–12 m depth

5–10 m
5 min.

Figure 7. Shallow-water timed scuba search (SWSs). 
WPT = waypoint.

OBJECTIVE EQUIPMENT
î	 Gain a broader understanding of where î	 Boat with working engine

aggregations of large sedentary species, mother- î	 GPS to record start and end positions of station
of-pearl shells such as trochus, green snails and 
pearl oysters generally trochus, are found on î	 Two stopwatches for timing, one per surveyor
the slopes of fringing reefs, lagoon patch reefs, î	 Two writing slates with pencil, one per surveyor 
barrier reefs and outer reefs.

î	 Invertebrate data record sheet (Appendix 5a) 
and identification cards (Appendix 3) mounted 
on slates

î	 Scuba gear, dive computer, wetsuit and 
PERSONNEL protective gloves

î	 At least four people are required for this assessment: two surveyors, a boat skipper and a boat assistant.

PROCEDURE
1.	 Avoid shallow water areas close to breakers if the current or swell is strong.
2.	 Record GPS positions from the boat, at the start and the end of the station. One time keeper is 

recommended for this assessment.
3.	 Two surveyors dive side-by-side (roughly 5–10 m apart) at a depth of 3–12 m along the reef front. Because 

scuba diving presents some risk, surveyors should always be aware of each other, and ensure they are 
close enough from their partner to be able to render assistance if needed.

4.	 Each surveyor counts and measures the mother-of-pearl shells that are observed such as trochus, green 
snails and pearl oysters, and other species of interest. 

5.	 Habitat observations are made at the end of the search.

22 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



3. Survey techniques and methodologies

Deepwater timed scuba search 

A deepwater timed scuba search (DWSs) is conducted in depths of 15–40 m, and targets the base of slopes of 
fringing reefs, lagoon patch reefs and barrier reefs, which are subject to water flow (near passages) and where 
deepwater sea cucumber species are found (Fig. 8). The replicate distance is not calibrated, but indicative 
distance can be assessed using start and end waypoints of the dive as recorded from the boat. 

WPT WPT 
start end

5–10 m 
5 min.

15–40 m depth

Figure 8. Deepwater timed scuba search (DWSs).
WPT = waypoint.

OBJECTIVE EQUIPMENT
î	 Assess the range, abundance and sizes of large î	 Boat with working engine

sedentary species in deep water (generally î	 GPS to record start and end positions of station
concentrating on deepwater sea cucumber 
species such as Holothuria fuscogilva and î	 Two stopwatches for timing, one per surveyor
Thelenota spp.). î	 Two writing slates with pencil, one per surveyor 

î	 Invertebrate data record sheet (Appendix 5a) 
and identification cards (Appendix 3) mounted 
on slates

î	 Scuba gear, dive computer, wetsuit and 
protective gloves

PERSONNEL
î	 At least four people are required for this assessment: two surveyors, a boat skipper and a boat assistant.

PROCEDURE
1.	 Record GPS positions from the boat, at the start and the end of the station. Either surveyor can keep the 

time, or each surveyor can keep their own time; communication between divers should be maintained.
2.	 Two surveyors dive side-by-side (roughly 5–10 m apart) at a depth of 15–40 m. Surveyors should progress 

at the same pace parallel to one another and maintaining the same distance all the way. Because scuba 
diving presents some risk, surveyors should always be aware of each other, and ensure they are close 
enough from their partner to be able to render assistance if needed.

3.	 Each surveyor measures a sample of deepwater sea cucumber species and other large invertebrates. 
While a few specimens can be measured, this should not interfere too much with the search progression.

4.	 Habitat observations are made at the end of the search. 

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 23



3. Survey techniques and methodologies

Sea cucumber night search 

A sea cucumber night search (SCNs) is useful for locating nocturnally active sea cucumber species such 
as Actinopyga miliaris and A. lecanora, and is best conducted around fringing reefs and lagoon patch reefs 
(especially reefs with high relief that are affected by terrigenous influences) that are less than 4 m deep. 

These searches are not distance calibrated but snorkelers record a waypoint when they enter the water and 
when they return to the boat (Fig. 9). A paddle canoe can be used for surveys in shallow water. A hand-held 
balance is needed to weigh the more variable shaped sea cucumbers (such as A. miliaris).

WPT 5–10 m WPT 
start 5 min. end

Figure 9. Sea cucumber night search 
(SCNs). WPT = waypoint.

OBJECTIVE EQUIPMENT
î	 Assess the abundance and measure the length î	 Canoe or boat with working engine

of nocturnally active sea cucumber species. î	 GPS to record start and end positions of station
î	 Two writing slates with pencil, one per surveyor 

PERSONNEL î	 Invertebrate data record sheet (Appendix 5a) 
and identification cards (Appendix 3) mounted 

î	 At least three people are required for this on slates
assessment: two surveyors and a boat driver. î	 Snorkelling gear, wetsuit and protective gloves

PROCEDURE î	 Underwater torches (flashlights), one per surveyor, 
and one for the boat driver to signal the boat 

1.	 Locate a suitable site during the day, with waypoints logged for ease of locating the site at night. Surveyors 
can get to the site at dusk and into the water once night has fallen.

2.	 Record GPS waypoints from the boat, at the start and finish points from where the surveyors enter and 
leave the water. 

3.	 Two surveyors snorkel side-by-side (roughly 5–10 m apart) at a depth of 0–4 m along fringing reefs and 
lagoon patch reefs. Surveyors should keep a look out for each other.

4.	 Surveyors count nocturnal sea cucumber species and record any other invertebrates of interest.
5.	 Surveyors collect any sea cucumbers that are to be weighed and place them in the boat. Specimens 

should be kept in some water (bottom of the canoe or boat, or water-filled bin) until they are weighed 
and returned to the sea quickly to limit any stress from the procedure.

Lobster night search 

Rock lobsters and slipper lobsters are best assessed at night using night timed searches (LNs) outside the reef 
behind the breakers, and timed reef searches by walking along the reef crest at low tide. 

Night searches for lobsters are done in the same manner as daytime timed searches along the same reef zone. 
Lobsters can be counted for a defined time (e.g. one hour) to collect information on the number of lobsters 
sighted per unit of effort. GPS records are taken at the start and end of each time period to estimate the distance 
covered during each search, which can be used to calculate lobster density. More information on this group of 
crustaceans, and potential survey methods, can be found in Appendix 4. Night assessments of lobsters outside 
the reef and close to breaking waves can be dangerous so caution must be taken when conducting these surveys. 

24 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



3. Survey techniques and methodologies

3.3	 Fine-scale survey techniques
Reef benthos transect

A fine-scale, reef benthos transect (RBt) survey is conducted on hard bottom substrates on fringing reefs, lagoon 
patch reefs, back-reefs, reef flats and reef crest areas to capture invertebrates associated with these habitats. 
RBt assessments provide a high level of accuracy of the range, abundance, size and condition of invertebrate 
species and their habitats on smaller spatial scales within fishing areas and areas of aggregated stocks. 

For a RBt, a transect is run perpendicular 
to the shoreline, or across environmental 
gradients where possible (usually across 40 x 1 m 
reefs and not along reef edges). A RBt can 5–10 m
also be conducted along the reef crest 
at low tide by walking and using a GPS 
odometer function to measure transect 
length. In this instance, transects are laid 
along the reef to assess species such as 
surf redfish, trochus and turban snails. 

Surveys consist of six 40 m x 1 m 
transects. Observations are made 
by snorkelling or walking at low tide 
(Fig. 10). Species and habitat data are Figure 10. Reef benthos transect (RBt).
recorded and a single waypoint is logged 
for each station (to an accuracy of within 
10 m).

OBJECTIVE EQUIPMENT
î	 Provide an accurate assessment of the î	 Boat with working engine

abundance, size and condition of invertebrate î	 40-m transect line with a weight and buoy at the 
species, including aggregations, on hard bottom end to indicate the length of the transect
habitats.

î	 GPS to record start and end positions of station
PERSONNEL î	 Two writing slates with pencil, one per surveyor 

î î	 Invertebrate data record sheet (Appendix 5a) 
	 At least three people are required for this and identification cards (Appendix 3) mounted 

assessment: two surveyors and a boat skipper. on slates
î	 Snorkelling gear, wetsuit and protective gloves

PROCEDURE
1.	 Anchor the boat when a suitable reef benthos habitat is located. Record the GPS waypoint as close to the 

survey position as possible (only one position is required for the six replicate transects of the station). 
2.	 Two surveyors get into the water (with their mask and snorkel) and attach one end of their 40-m line to a 

point on the reef (or places the weight) before swimming the other end of their line to a point 40 m away 
where the end weight is placed (or lines may be tied to dead coral). 

3.	 Surveyors swim along each side of the transect line and record all epibenthic invertebrate resources, 
including gastropods, sea cucumbers, giant clams, sea stars and urchin species (as potential indicators of 
habitat condition) within a 1-m swath of benthos. An estimate of habitat cover is recorded at the end of 
each replicate.

4.	 Three transects are conducted by each surveyor giving a total of six replicates per station.
5.	 Habitat observations are made at the end of the search.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 25



3. Survey techniques and methodologies

Soft benthos transect 

The soft benthos transect (SBt) is used specifically for soft bottom, mangrove-associated seagrass beds in 
order to assess sea cucumbers and other associated species. Similar to an RBt, an SBt station comprises six 
40 m x 1 m transects. Soft benthos transects are run perpendicular to the shoreline. Observations are made 
by snorkelling or by walking at low tide (Fig. 11). Species data and habitat estimate are recorded, and a GPS 
position is logged for each station (to an accuracy of within 10 m). 

40 x 1 m 
5–10 m

Figure 11. Soft benthos transect (SBt).

OBJECTIVE EQUIPMENT
î	 Provide an accurate assessment of the range, î	 Boat with working engine

abundance, size and condition of invertebrate î	 40-m transect line with a weight and buoy at the 
species, including aggregations, on soft bottom end to indicate the length of the transect
seagrass bed habitats.

î	 GPS to record start and end positions of station
î	 Two writing slates with pencil, one per surveyor 
î	 Invertebrate data record sheet (Appendix 5a) 

and identification cards (Appendix 3) mounted 
on slates

î	 Snorkelling gear, wetsuit and protective gloves
PERSONNEL
î	 At least three people are required for this assessment: two surveyors and a boat skipper.

PROCEDURE
1.	 Anchor the boat when a suitable reef benthos habitat is located. Record the GPS waypoint as close to the 

survey position as possible (only one position is required for the six replicate transects of the station). 
2.	 Two surveyors get into the water (with their mask and snorkel) and attach one end of their 40-m line to a 

point on the reef (or places the weight) before swimming the other end of their line to a point 40 m away 
where the end weight is placed (or lines may be tied to dead coral). 

3.	 Surveyors swim along each side of the transect line and record all epibenthic invertebrate resources, 
including gastropods, sea cucumbers, giant clams, sea stars and urchin species (as potential indicators of 
habitat condition) within a 1-m swath of benthos. An estimate of habitat cover is recorded at the end of 
each replicate.

4.	 Three transects are conducted by each surveyor giving a total of six replicates per station.
5.	 Habitat observations are made at the end of the search.

26 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



3. Survey techniques and methodologies

Shallow water scuba transect1 

A shallow water scuba transect (SWSt) entails six 40 m x 2 m transects (Fig. 12), and is designed to provide a 
fine-scale assessment of areas where aggregations of mother-of-pearl shells exist.

The depth range for this assessment is 3–12 m. Transects are placed randomly within identified areas, generally 
across depth and habitat gradients. A hip-mounted surveyor measurement system (e.g. Chainman®, thread 
release measures) is used to measure out the 40-m transects. Chainman® are easier to use than transect tape 
measures because they do not require retrieval. This saves time and energy, and speeds up the process for 
data collection in areas where working conditions are often dynamic. 

WPT 40 x 2 m WPT 
start 5–10 m end

3–12 m depth

Figure 12. Shallow water scuba transect (SWSt). WPT = waypoint.

OBJECTIVE EQUIPMENT
î	 Collect accurate data from areas where î	 Boat with working engine

populations of mother-of-pearl shells are found î	 GPS to record start and end positions of station
in reasonable densities. At these stations, 
the abundance and size distribution of large î	 Two writing slates with pencil, one per surveyor 
sedentary species are measured. î	 Invertebrate data record sheet (Appendix 5a) 

and identification cards (Appendix 3) mounted 
PERSONNEL on slates

î	 At least four people are required for this î	 Chainman® loaded with thread line
assessment: two surveyors, a boat skipper and a î	 Scuba gear, dive computer, wetsuit and 
boat assistant to support the divers and skipper. protective gloves

PROCEDURE
1.	 Allocate time at the end of each 40-m transect in order to complete all observations, including habitat data. 

A 5–10 m space is left between transects before a new transect is begun.
2.	 Two surveyors on scuba dive side-by-side (5–10 m apart) along the reef front at a depth range of 3–12 m. 

One surveyor controls the Chainman® and communicates the start and end point of each 40-m transect to 
the other surveyor. Because scuba diving presents some risk, surveyors should always be aware of each 
other, and ensure they are close enough from their partner to be able to render assistance if needed.

3.	 Surveyors should progress at a similar pace to the other surveyor, maintaining the same distance apart for 
the length of the transect. The surveyor who is not holding the Chainman® should ensure they stop their 
transect at the signal of the partner that has the Chainman®.

4.	 Each surveyor takes accurate measurements (to the nearest millimetre) of species observed such as 
trochus, gastropods and giant clams along the 40-m transect. For sea cucumber species, measurements 
can be rounded to the nearest 5 mm.

5.	 Surveyors record the size of a subset (e.g. 15–20) of the species of interest (if they are too numerous), and 
record the rest only as a count.

1 This technique has also been referred to as mother-of-pearl transect (MOPt) in some SPC reports.
Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 27



3. Survey techniques and methodologies

Soft infaunal quadrat survey

A soft infaunal quadrat (SiQ) survey is used to assess infaunal species (animals that burrow and live within the 
bottom substratum) such as Anadara spp., Gafrarium spp. and juveniles of other soft benthos species. An SiQ 
survey is usually done at low tide in seagrass areas (Fig. 13). SiQ is conducted within a 40 m x 2 m transect with 
eight sets of quadrats on either sides of the transect. 

40 x 2 m 
0.25 m

WPT 
start

WPT 
end

Figure 13. Soft infaunal quadrat (SiQ) survey. 
WPT = waypoint.

OBJECTIVE EQUIPMENT
î	 Assess the abundance, distribution and size î	 GPS to record position of station

of infaunal invertebrates (generally bivalve î	 One writing slate with pencil and ruler
resources) at the scale of seagrass areas or shell 
beds. î	 Invertebrate data record sheet (Appendix 5a), 

SiQ data record sheet (Appendix 5c) and 
identification cards (Appendix 3) mounted on 
slates

î	 Two 25 cm x 25 cm quadrats made of wire, one 
per surveyor

î	 Surveyors should wear booties or boots with a 
strong sole, protective gloves and a hat

PERSONNEL
î	 At least three people are required for this assessment: two surveyors and a recorder.

PROCEDURE
1.	 Identify an area to be sampled using the SiQ technique.
2.	 Consult a local tide chart to determine the time of day to conduct the survey. The best time to conduct 

these surveys is at low tide. Considering the short low tide time (around two hours), the survey team 
should make full use of the low tide period.

3.	 Record the GPS positions at the start and the end of each station. Habitat data should also be recorded. 
4.	 Two surveyors side by side, randomly throw the quadrat and retrieve sediments within the quadrat down 

to approx 5–8 cm and sort through the sediment for infaunal species; species found are measured and 
recorded. Counts and size data are recorded onto the SiQ record sheet.

5.	 Sample eight groups of four quadrats every 5–6 m between the start and end points of the 40-m transect. 

28 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



3. Survey techniques and methodologies

Techniques for surveying coconut crab

Coconut crabs (Birgus latro) live on high islands, low-lying islands and atolls. More information on this species 
can be found in Appendix 4.

High islands 

Baited trails: Tethered opened coconuts are used as lures (similar to how subsistence communities hunt for 
coconut crabs). Baits are set out in an ordered grid system (equidistant apart and the same number of traps 
per survey sample) through the forest area. The baits are inspected regularly throughout the night. This 
involves setting a number of baits along a trail during the day and revisiting the baits after dark, collecting the 
crabs that are attracted to the baits. The density of crabs can only be estimated from catch per unit of effort 
(number of crabs per coconut bait). Size and sex ratio (male to female) information can also be gathered. 

For more detailed information refer to Fletcher and Amos (1994) (see Section 5) and Appendix 4. 

Low-lying islands and atolls 

Small, low-lying islands and atolls can be surveyed more easily than larger high islands. On small islands and 
atolls, coconut crab stocks can be assessed by laying transects across the entire island. Transect length can 
be measured by taking a distance between two GPS points or from a GPS trip odometer function where GPS 
reception is good. A more traditional approach is to mark out several fixed transects (paths) across the island 
(from beach to beach) with a set width (e.g. 5 m) and survey these areas over time (during the night and day) 
to monitor changes in crab abundance, size and sex ratio. These data are used to calculate density, and if the 
total area of the island is known, a stock estimate can be made. 

3.4	 Quality of information from each survey technique
The distribution, density and size of species of interest are some of the key data that are needed to make an 
assessment of resource status. Different sampling techniques do not provide the same information, so the 
most appropriate survey technique needs to be selected, based on the species of interest and the survey 
objective. Table 1 provides information on the quality of data generated from each of the methods introduced 
in Section 3. The selection of the appropriate survey method to suit the project objectives and budget is an 
important consideration when planning a survey, and staff at SPC’s Coastal Fisheries Programme are available 
to offer advice.

Resource distribution: Techniques covering broad spatial areas across a site can offer the most realistic 
understanding of resource distribution and help to locate areas where more focused surveys should be 
conducted. In this case, a manta tow is often a good choice because it covers a large area and, because it uses 
an engine, it can be relatively quick to complete over large spatial scales. RFs, RFw and SWSs can also be used 
at stations placed across considerable distances, but these techniques require more physical effort and more 
time to complete. 

Specimen counts: In order to get counts of species of interest, the surveyor needs time to accurately count 
individuals. Therefore, techniques that allow the sampler to stop and carefully investigate an area are preferred. 
The following are considered the best techniques for obtaining high quality information on counts: RBt, SBt, 
SWSt, SiQ, RFw, SWSs, DWSs and LNs.

Resource density: Density calculations are based on counts made over a known surface area. High quality 
density estimations can be calculated from stations that allow accurate counts over a precisely defined area. 

For broad-scale surveys that are not constrained by transect tapes or quadrats, the search area for transects 
and stations will vary depending on the distance the surveyor can swim or walk, and the width at which the 
surveyor can visually detect individual specimens. The actual distance and width of samples using timed swims 
and/or walks or approximate distance measurements, and the accuracy can vary due to water turbidity, depth, 
complexity of the environment, and current speed. Therefore, in order to have comparable data between 

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 29



3. Survey techniques and methodologies

stations of the same type it is essential to conduct surveys under similar field conditions at each station. Following 
these rules will allow a better comparison by lowering the variability of the area covered in the station.

Specimen size: Measuring the size of specimens is important for a variety of reasons. For example, to estimate 
the harvestable number of trochus within a population, measurements are compared to legal harvest sizes. 
Techniques that allow the surveyor to stop and take time to carefully measure the specimens (e.g. RBt, SBt, 
SiQ and SWSt) are the best techniques to adopt when accurate measures are needed. In some cases, less 
accurate measures are sufficient (e.g. ranking adult and juvenile size groupings of crown-of-thorns starfish); 
these types of measurements can be collected during manta tow surveys.

Table 1.	Survey methods and the quality of information generated by each.

Survey method Species Species Specimen size 
identification distribution Specimen count Species density and population 

condition
Manta tow Manta Medium High (larger Medium (speed Medium (transect Poor (non-stop 

tow (larger size coverage area) of survey, depth, length taken from assessment, cannot 
species) clarity, current can GPS rather than stop to take ruler or 

limit observations) measured in situ) tape measurements)
Reef-front RFs Medium (for Medium Medium (swim Low (less accurate Poor (no size record, 
timed swim target species) (medium survey distant from coverage area – need to cover larger 

coverage area) the benthos) GPS points) area)
Reef-front RFw High (for target Medium High (walk at slow Medium (area High (access to 
timed walk species) (medium speed, able to count estimated from sufficient size 

coverage area) accurately) GPS) measures)
Shallow-water SWSs Medium (aim Medium High (moderate to Poor (estimated Medium (good 
timed scuba to locate (medium low movement) area, with searching access to species, 
search aggregations) coverage area) to find suitable but generally this is 

habitat) a search for trochus)
Deepwater DWSs Medium (for Medium High (moderate to Low (coverage area Medium (time limits 
timed scuba target species) (medium low movement, able less accurate from for deep diving 
search coverage area to pick up target GPS points) precludes multiple 

but difficult to species) measures)
select suitable 
habitat from 
the surface)

Sea cucumber SCNs High (for target Low (small Low (low lighting, Poor (coverage area Medium (target sea 
night search species) coverage area) clarity limit visibility) is less accurate) cucumber species)
Reef benthos RBt High (accurately Low (only per High (target High (well defined High (access to 
transect identify species) station, small habitat and species area and accurate sufficient size 

coverage area) aggregations) count) measures)
Soft benthos SBt High (accurately Low (only per High (target High (well defined High (access to 
transect identify species) station, small habitat and species area and accurate sufficient size 

coverage area) aggregations) count) measures)
Shallow water SWSt High (accurately Low (small High (target High (well defined High (access to 
scuba transect identify species) coverage area) habitat and species area and accurate sufficient size 

aggregations) count) measures from 
aggregations)

Soft infaunal SiQ High (for target Poor (digging High (survey covers High (well defined High (good access 
quadrat species) requirement the sampled area) area and count) to target species)

limits area 
coverage)

Lobster night LNs High (for target Low (coverage High (for target Medium (coverage Poor (unable to 
search species) area limited) species) area less accurate) measure sizes)
Baited Crab High (for target High (able to High (moderate to High (estimated High (access to 
coconut bait species) cover a large low movement, able from the number of sufficient size 

area) to pick up target crabs per coconut measures)
species) bait)

30 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers

FINE-SCALE SURVEY BROAD-SCALE SURVEY



3. Survey techniques and methodologies

3.5	 Time estimates and costs associated with conducting a survey
Appendix 6 provides estimated costs and equipment by survey method for completing a general invertebrate 
survey over a site of approximately 50 km2 (10 km by 5 km). Such a survey needs approximately 50 hours and 
40 minutes of field work to complete (around 6 days). However, this is the actual time needed on site and it 
does not include travel time to and from the site. As an example, if it takes 1 hour to get to the site and 1 hour to 
return, field work time would be a standard work day (8 hours) minus 2 hours for travel time, leaving 6 hours 
of field work per day. Therefore, in the example in Table 6.3 of Appendix 6, where 50 hours and 40 minutes 
are needed for the total survey time, the overall survey would take approximately 9 working days to complete 
based on a standard 8-hour day.

Knowing the amount of time it takes to complete a full survey, including travel time, allows the actual cost 
of the survey to be calculated. Staff costs can be calculated based on daily wages (or salary) for each survey 
member. Total boat expenses can be calculated if the hourly cost of boat use is known (including outboard 
fuel, oil and maintenance). The total cost for dive tanks is calculated from the individual cost for renting or 
refilling. If dive gear or other specialist equipment is needed, then these costs need to be added to the overall 
costing of the planned survey. Finally, a contingency should be factored in to cover unplanned events (e.g. bad 
weather).

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 31



32 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



4. Data entry and 
analysis to answer 

management questions
This Section presents the stages of processing and extracting information that are 
required after completing field data collection. For quality control purposes, the use 
of the standardised regional Reef Fisheries Integrated Database (RFID) developed for 
PICTs by SPC is recommended as the main data management tool. RFID is designed to 
make data entry and analysis easier, and provide quality control and safe storage of data 
for future comparisons. However, given the difficulties of such technologies in remote 
islands, Microsoft Excel spreadsheet procedures are provided as the second option for 
analysing data collected from field surveys.

The main stock status indicators of interest for fishery management are:
•	 Species lists
•	 Species distribution patterns
•	 Abundance and density measures
•	 Size frequency (size class structure)
•	 Standing stock measures

This Section provides guidance on analysing stock status indicators through working 
examples. The different ways of presenting results from the different assessments 
are provided to address the distribution and habitat specificity of species, the status 
of resources, and the success of management practices (e.g. fishery closures, habitat 
protection). This manual does not address management responses in detail, but 
rather provides information on how to collect and examine data for better-informed 
management and decision making. 

4.1	 Data entry and quality control
Before any data analysis is done, data must first be entered into the computer and 
checked for correctness. This important step ensures that correct results are produced, 
and that errors as a result of incorrect data entry are avoided. The use of RFID as a tool is 
encouraged in this manual in order to improve PICTs’ data management and use. 

Cleaning data (checking)

Data cleaning or checking begins in the field but the final checking is done during data 
entry and before any analysis is performed. This can be done either by an individual, or 
by two people cross-checking data together between the computer screen and the raw 
data. The latter is considered to be more useful because errors can be picked up easily. 

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 33



4. Data entry and analysis to answer management questions

Running queries in RFID

A database ‘query’ is a ‘question’ you ask of the information you have entered into the database. Results 
(output) of the query are information returned to you by the database management system. There are several 
queries in the database but the main ones used for invertebrate data analysis are:
•	  species presence by station type (to assess the number of species recorded);
•	  average density by species and/or transects and stations (to assess abundance); and
•	  length frequency by site and species (to assess size distribution). 

Exporting data to excel spreadsheet 

RFID is compatible with Microsoft Excel, and query results can be copied from RFID and pasted into Excel 
spreadsheets for further processing. Other data analysis software is available but Excel is most widely used in 
PICTs. Simply copy and paste the query summary table onto an Excel spreadsheet page. 
 
In the absence of RFID, all data can be entered directly into a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet and associated 
functions can be used to extract desired results.

4.2	 Analysis of stock status indicators 
Number of species present

The number of species present is simply the total count of different invertebrate species observed in a site or 
a defined reef habitat area. This information is important for monitoring macroinvertebrate assemblages for 
baseline assessments or monitoring diversity in multispecies fisheries to assess the state of species that might 
require certain protection measures.

In resource assessments, the chances of detecting all the species of importance that are present at a site or 
station increases with increased sampling effort (number of stations or time at a station). That is, the higher 
the number of stations or transects (replicates) completed, the higher the number of species recorded until 
a certain point is reached where additional transects will not reveal any more species (all species present are 
counted). On the other hand, too little sampling effort will likely underestimate species presence. Therefore, 
a high number of stations and transect effort is always recommended to improve information about species 
presence in an area.

Species presence for baseline surveys

The assessment methods provided in this manual are specific to habitat types to enable distinction of data 
by habitats. Table 2 provides an example of how the number of species observed varies with different survey 
methods conducted in different habitat types. In this example, it can be seen that a combination of methods 
is required to capture the number of species that are present in an area more accurately. If the same amount 
of survey effort and observations are done at another reef or at the same reef at another time, relative species 
presence can be compared with some degree of certainty.

34 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



4. Data entry and analysis to answer management questions

Table 2. Species detected by method and habitat type (based on hypothetical data).

Group Scientific name Manta tow Reef benthos transect (RBt) Soft benthos transect (SBt)
Back-reef and lagoon slope Back-reef zone Seagrass bed

Echinoderm – Sea cucumber Actinopyga mauritiana + + +
Echinoderm – Sea cucumber Bohadschia argus + +
Echinoderm – Sea cucumber Holothuria atra + + +
Echinoderm – Sea cucumber Holothuria edulis + +
Echinoderm – Sea cucumber Holothuria whitmaei +
Bivalve Pinctada margaritifera +
Bivalve Tridacna maxima + + +
Gastropod Charonia tritonis +
Gastropod Conus flavidus +
Gastropod Cypraea annulus +
Gastropod Lambis truncata + +
Gastropod Turbo setosus + +
Echinoderm – Sea Star Linckia laevigata +
Echinoderm – Sea Urchin Echinometra mathaei + + +
Echinoderm – Sea Urchin Echinothrix diadema +
Echinoderm – Sea Urchin Tripneustes gratilla + + +
Total species count 16 11 13 6 

Table 3. Species Common name Scientific name Presence Number of individuals observed Rank
presence and 

Lollyfish Holothuria atra + 	 715 	 1
ranking by number 
of individuals Chalkfish Bohadschia similis + 	 250 	 2
observed for a Sandfish Holothuria scabra + 	 221 	 3
sea cucumber Dragonfish Stichopus horrens + 	 108 	 4
fishery (based on Snakefish Holothuria coluber + 	 69 	 5
hypothetical data)

Greenfish Stichopus chloronotus + 	 60 	 6
Tigerfish / Leopardfish Bohadschia argus + 	 56 	 7
Brown sandfish Bohadschia vitiensis + 	 43 	 8
Hairy blackfish Actinopyga miliaris + 	 26 	 9
Pinkfish Holothuria edulis + 	 24 	 10
Curryfish Stichopus herrmanni + 	 23 	 11
Red snakefish Holothuria flavomaculata + 	 20 	 12
Golden sandfish Holothuria lessoni + 	 17 	 13
Black teatfish Holothuria whitmaei + 	 15 	 14
Elephant trunkfish Holothuria fuscopunctata + 	 13 	 15
White teatfish Holothuria fuscogilva + 	 12 	 16
Prickly redfish Thelenota ananas + 	 10 	 17
Flowerfish Pearsonothuria graeffei + 	 8 	 18
Surf redfish Actinopyga mauritiana + 	 6 	 19
Deepwater blackfish Actinopyga palauensis + 	 5 	 20
Stonefish Actinopyga lecanora + 	 4 	 21
Brown curryfish Stichopus vastus + 	 2 	 22
Amberfish Thelenota anax + 	 1 	 23
Total number of species recorded 23

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 35



4. Data entry and analysis to answer management questions

Species distribution patterns and habitat preferences

Invertebrate species are distributed unevenly from the shore to the outer reef (horizontal distribution), and 
from shallow to deep outer slope and passages (vertical distribution). 

Species distribution patterns are closely correlated with the spatial patterns of different habitats (e.g. cover of 
seagrass or corals, sediment or substratum characteristics, and relative exposure to wave action and currents). 
For example, habitat preference for juveniles of some gastropods such as trochus (Tectus niloticus) are the 
back-reef and reef flat zones where there is high habitat relief and complexity, while adult trochus inhabit the 
outer reef and near passes where greater water flow is experienced. Figure 14 illustrates a typical complex 
reef profile indicating the location of different habitat zones and their nomenclature used in the description of 
species distributions in this manual. 

Fringing 
reef Lagoon Barrier reef

Figure 14. Standardised terminology for habitat descriptions used in this manual.

Horizontal distribution

GPS positions of stations and records of species present can be used to understand species and habitat 
distribution on the reef, as in the example in Figure 15. In this example, the horizontal distribution of surf 
redfish (Actinopyga mauritiana) is presented based on assessments conducted across the Pacific by SPC. 
The main habitat of A. mauritiana is along the reef crest, surf zone and outer shoal of the barrier reef, while 
moderate to low densities are found on the back-reef of the barrier reef, lagoon patch reefs and fringing reef 
edges. In a fringing reef system, this species would aggregate along the fringing reef edge.

Highest density
Moderate density
Low density
Absent (rare)

Figure 15. Actinopyga mauritiana distribution profile in a complex reef system. 
Results presented here are from an amalgamated dataset from Pacific-wide surveys undertaken by SPC. White zones = not 

present; light green zones = low densities; green zones = medium densities; dark green = high densities.

36 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers

Mangrove

Seagrass bed

Back-reef of fringing reef

Fringing reef edge

Inner lagoon

Lagoon patch reef

Outer lagoon

Back-reef of barrier reef

Reef at

Reef crest

Surf zone / Reef front

Outer shoal

Outer
slope



4. Data entry and analysis to answer management questions

Vertical distribution

Understanding patterns of species’ vertical distribution (depth distribution) is equally important. Figure 16 
shows an example of the vertical distribution of Actinopyga mauritiana based on pooled SPC data from multiple 
Pacific Island sites. From this information, it could be concluded that A. mauritiana is a shallow water species 
that is found in depths of 0–10 m with the highest density found within the first meter of depth. A. mauritiana is 
a very shallow water species that can be easily overharvested without effective management measures in place. 

Density (ind. ha-1)

0 50 100 150 200 250

0–1

1–2

2–3

3–4

4–5

5–6

6–7

7–8

8–9

9–10

Figure 16. Relative density of Actinopyga mauritiana by depth. 
Density estimates are from pooled data from Pacific Island sites surveyed 

by the Secretariat of the Pacific Community.

Spatial distribution

Obtaining spatial distribution data of species 
across all stations in a survey area is becoming 
increasingly possible with the development 
of GPS recorders and geographic information 
system (GIS) mapping software technologies. 
Distribution of species and their local density by 
station enables better understanding of both 
the distribution of species and their aggregation 
across the site of interest. Further explanation 
on the causes of such distribution can then be 
provided, which could range from habitat type, 
distance from population centres, managed areas 
verses unmanaged areas or current flow patterns. 
This information is also of interest to fishers, which 
could lead to targeted fishing and overharvesting 
if suitable management measures are not in place 
when this information is published. The example 
in Figure 17 shows the spatial distribution of 
Bohadschia argus densities on the reef system of 
Yap (Federated States of Micronesia)

Figure 17. Distribution of Bohadschia argus described by 
density measures from survey stations across an island 

in the Pacific (larger circles represent higher densities at 
survey stations).

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 37

Depth (m)



4. Data entry and analysis to answer management questions

Abundance and density measures

Species density is the number of individuals of a species in a given area at a given time. Density can be used to 
determine the health of a fishery stock or ecosystem. Density of slow-moving or fixed-bottom living (sedentary) 
species are calculated by dividing the number of individuals in an area by the area assessed. 

Density = Specimen count / area assessed in hectares (ha)

Density calculations are done automatically by RFID, and query and generated results can be copied to 
Microsoft Excel spreadsheets for further analysis and graphics. The calculation of densities in RFID is based 
on average area coverage by survey types provided in Table 4. Summary tables such as Table 5, yield two 
main types of mean densities (‘Present mean density’ and ‘Overall mean density’) with their standard errors. 
Indicative survey areas are provided for timed assessment types and it is recommended that the actual areas 
used in surveys be substituted for these general approximations.

Table 4. The standard and estimated area covered by each survey technique.

Survey method Transect Transect Transect surface Number of transects Station surface 
length (m) width (m) area (m2) (replicates) per station area (m2)

BROAD-SCALE SURVEY TECHNIQUES
Manta tow Manta 300 2 600 6 3,600
Reef-front timed swim RFs ~ 137* 3.5* 478* 6 2,870*
Reef-front timed walk RFw ~ 141* 2.5* 353* 6 2,120*
Shallow-water timed SWSs ~ 88* 3* 266* 6 1,596*
scuba search
Deepwater timed scuba DWSs ~ 126* 6* 754* 6 4,524*
search
Sea cucumber night SCNs 73* 2* 146* 6 876*
search

FINE-SCALE SURVEY TECHNIQUES
Reef benthos transect RBt 40 1 40 6 240
Soft benthos transect SBt 40 1 40 6 240
Shallow water scuba SWSt 40 2 80 6 480
transect+

Soft infaunal quadrat SiQ 40 ** ** ** 2
+	 Also called MOPt in other reports by the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC).
*	 Estimation based on hundreds of stations with the help of GPS start and finish records. GIS software allowed these estimated 

areas to be defined from SPC field experience. 
**	 Soft infaunal quadrat stations consist of 32 quadrats of 25 cm x 25 cm.

38 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



4. Data entry and analysis to answer management questions

Overall mean density

Overall mean density is the density of a species for all stations and transects and for the same survey type 
conducted at the site, including stations and transects with and without zero records.

Present mean density 

The present mean density of a species is the density of a species calculated using only stations and transects 
of the same survey type where that species was recorded (record ≥ 1).

Both overall mean density and present mean density can be used to understand the nature of the distribution of 
species (patchiness and nature of aggregations) over the site of interest. Percentage present is the percentage 
of stations and/or transects (replicates) where the species is present. In Table 5, Actinopyga mauritiana was 
observed in 9% of transects and 15% of stations, indicating that the species may be relatively rare across the site 
and was never in dense aggregations even when it was located. 

Standard error and standard deviation

Standard error (SE) is the standard deviation (STD) of the sample-mean’s estimate of a population mean. 
It is calculated using the formula SE = STD / √n, where STD is the standard deviation, and n is the number of 
samples (e.g. stations or transects) from which the mean density is calculated. This is done automatically by 
RFID when the density query is run. Manual calculation of SE and STD using Microsoft Excel is provided in 
Appendix 7.

Table 5. Mean density for reef benthos transect surveys (density values are in number hectare-1).
All Transects Transect_P All Stations Station_P

Species Overall 
mean SE n Present 

mean SE n_P %_P Overall 
mean SE n Present 

mean SE n_P % _P

Actinopyga 38.5 16.5 78 428.6 105.1 7 9.0 38.5 27.7 13 250.0 83.3 2 15.4
mauritiana
Holothuria 28.8 14.4 78 450.0 122.5 5 6.4 28.8 19.7 13 187.5 20.8 2 15.4
atra
Tridacna 3,003.2 381.7 78 3,718.3 425.6 63 80.8 3,003.2 889.4 13 3,253.5 927.8 12 92.3
maxima
Tectus 1253.2 255.9 78 2,715.3 445.7 36 46.2 1253.2 572.3 13 1,810.2 763.9 9 75.0
niloticus

Mean = mean density (in number ha-1); Transect_P = results of transect where species is present; Station_P = results of station 
where species is present; n = number of transects or stations; SE = standard error; n_P = number of transects or stations where 
species is present; % _P = percentage of transects and stations when a record is present.

In this example, the coverage area for all transects and all stations surveyed are the same, and therefore 
derive the same overall mean densities. Note that the present density is typically higher for Transect_P than 
Station_P because Transect_P assesses density of all transects with records while Station_P contains some 
transects with zero records.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 39



4. Data entry and analysis to answer management questions

Presentation of species density by individual survey type 

Species density by survey type can be presented graphically. For example, Figure 18 shows a graphical 
presentation of mean density for 18 sea cucumber species from RBt assessments from a Pacific Island site. 
Standard errors indicate the spread in the range of data that was used to calculate the mean. Presenting 
data in this manner clearly demonstrates densities of individual species and allows for comparisons among 
species or treatments (e.g. marine protected area or marine managed area versus marine non-protected area 
or non-managed marine area sites). In the example below, three species of sea cucumber occurred in greater 
densities than the others: Bohadschia similis, Holothuria atra and the high-value H. scabra. From such graphical 
displays, it is possible to compare this site’s data with similar sites in the Pacific, and discuss reasons as to why 
the high density of some species was recorded (e.g. whether there is a managed area at the site or whether 
the fishery has been closed).

1,800

1,600

1,400

1,200

100

800

600

400

200

0

Species
Figure 18. Mean density of sea cucumbers (± SE) from soft benthos transect surveys conducted at a Pacific Island site. 

Presentation of species density combined across different survey types

Data collected using assessment methodologies that survey the same area such as RBt, SBt and SWSt can 
be grouped to assess overall densities of invertebrate species. This is frequently necessary in invertebrate 
assessments where different methods are used in different habitats to obtain overall densities of a species 
for stock estimation purposes and for comparisons among sites or surveys to better understand trends in 
resource status. This can be achieved in RFID by selecting the desired methodologies (e.g. RBt and SBt, or 
RBt and SWSt) when establishing a query. Density assessments from manta tow surveys should be treated 
separately because the sample area is larger than the sampled area of RBt, SBt and SWSt. This presents some 
issues when assessing overall densities for species such as lollyfish, which can be surveyed across multiple 
habitats using multiple methods (e.g. manta tow, RBt, SBt). A solution would be to look at estimating the 
density based on the area of reef zone covered by the different assessment methods.

Harvest assessment reference points

Harvest assessment reference points, whether they are based on complicated stock viability analyses or on 
comparative datasets taken from similar sites across a fishery, offer useful information (rules of thumb) that 
fisheries managers can use to swiftly and efficiently assess whether their stocks are harvested to a point of 
potential recruitment depletion or are still in good shape. If fished to below what is considered to be a healthy 
reference point, stocks may be less able to supply juveniles to sustain or increase the population.

40 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers

Mean density (ind. ha-1)

B. similis

H. atra

H. scabra

S. horrens

H. hila

H. coluber

B. vitiensis

A. miliaris

S. chloronotus

H. edulis

S. herrmanni

H. 	avomaculata

B. argus

H. lessoni

S. vastus

H. nobilis

H. fuscogilva

A. mauritiana



4. Data entry and analysis to answer management questions

Stock density can be an informative reference point for assessing the status of invertebrate resources. Because 
there is too little information known about the life history of many species and the fisheries that impact these 
resources, SPC has developed ‘rule of thumb’ density reference points to help managers assess the health 
of their stocks by comparing data against what might be considered to be a ‘natural’ or close to a natural 
density for that species. In reality, site-specific species density reference points are more accurate because 
species density varies by geographical location, island type, habitat and local oceanographic conditions. For 
the purposes of this manual, regional species reference points have been calculated using numerous records 
from past and present assessments from around the Pacific. For trochus fisheries, a healthy stock density 
reference for all trochus sizes has been established at 500–600 individuals per hectare.

Healthy stock reference densities for 18 sea cucumber species (by survey method) have been developed 
(Table 6) for use in the absence of site-specific density references and as a guide to developing new site 
density reference points. These figures were derived from individual species densities across 91 sites assessed 
in 17 countries over the period 2002–2012 and taking the mean of the upper 25% of these densities. Effectively, 
they are an average of the 25% of the highest abundance (densities) from the Pacific Island dataset. These 
regional densities can be used as a baseline to check for healthy abundances of sea cucumbers, however more 
work is recommended to refine these densities for each individual situation (e.g. island type). Results of size 
distribution can be used in conjunction with reference densities to determine suitable harvest quotas. 

Table 6. Pacific regional reference densities for healthy sea cucumber stocks (Pacific dataset2).
Reference densities (ind. ha-1)

Common name Scientific name Code
Manta RBt; SBt

Lollyfish Holothuria atra LF 2,400 5,600*
Greenfish Stichopus chloronotus GF 1,000 3,500**
Chalkfish Bohadschia similis CHF - 1,400***
Snakefish Holothuria coluber SNF 350 1,100*
Sandfish Holothuria scabra SF - 700***
Pinkfish Holothuria edulis PF 250 260*
Surf redfish Actinopyga mauritiana SRF 20 200**
Brown sandfish Bohadschia vitiensis BSF 160 100*
Hairy blackfish Actinopyga miliaris HBF - 150***
Curryfish Stichopus herrmanni CF 130 100*
Tigerfish / Leopardfish Bohadschia argus TF 50 120**
Flowerfish Pearsonothuria graeffei FF 50 100**
Black teatfish Holothuria whitmaei BTF 10 50*
Prickly redfish Thelenota ananas PRF 10 30**
Amberfish Thelenota anax AF 20 -
White teatfish Holothuria fuscogilva WTF - 20*
Elephant trunkfish Holothuria fuscopunctata ETF 10 10*
Stonefish Actinopyga lecanora STF - 10**

* = RBt and SBt combined; ** = RBt only; *** = SBt only.

2 Reference densities were derived from 1,122 manta tow stations, 1,493 reef benthos stations and 476 soft benthos stations.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 41



4. Data entry and analysis to answer management questions

Stock biomass and weight 

Stock biomass is important information in fisheries management and development because it enables the 
evaluation of production trends and marketable value of a resource. Biomass is typically obtained from 
abundance data coupled with size (length or width) or weight data. 

Therefore, to help fishery management, conversion ratios are used for converting length measurements to 
weight, and wet weight to commercial product dry weights. Often, there is also a requirement to convert the 
hard and soft edible portions of invertebrates into meaningful measures (e.g. when considering the ratio of 
trochus or clam shells to trochus or clam meat).

Soft-bodied invertebrates that can vary significantly in length within the same species (e.g. sea cucumbers) are 
often very difficult to measure or weigh with precision when they are alive. Most commercial sea cucumbers 
contract when handled, so body length can differ greatly from the length of undisturbed animals. Some species 
contract and expand markedly, so size limits based on weight, rather than length, may be more appropriate. 
This is particularly true for most Actinopyga spp., Stichopus herrmanni and Holothuria atra. Sea cucumbers can 
also gain in width and/or body height while their body weight remains unchanged. Currently, a mean weight 
to length ratio is used to deal with this limitation in the absence of more detailed length-weight conversion 
ratios for each species (Appendix 8). In contrast, some other species, such as H. scabra and H. lessoni, undergo 
minor contractions of body length compared with other species and are, thus, less problematic to manage 
using length-based measures.

Size distribution and recruitment

The size range and number of specimens found in the small, medium and large size classes of invertebrates 
from a single species give critical information for understanding the health of that population. This information 
also demonstrates how well a species is sustaining its population by indicating the presence of new recruits and 
juveniles, and the status of large breeding adults. If the size structure of a species consists of a high proportion 
of small animals compared with mature fishable adults, then the stock is likely to be young with a lower mean 
size. In this case, fishing would not be recommended because individuals have not reached reproductive 
maturity. In addition, larger individuals typically produce substantially more eggs that have better survivorship 
than smaller individuals. In the example in Figure 19, the majority of trochus shells assessed at this site are 
under the minimum legal harvest size and, therefore, a commercial harvest would not be recommended. The 
high abundance of individuals in the 30–80 mm size range suggests active recruitment, which is a good sign 
for the future recovery of the fishery.

25

20

15

10

5

0
20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 120 125 130 135 140 145 150

Length (mm)

Figure 19. Trochus size distribution for a Pacific Island site. 
Red arrow indicates a minimum legal size of 90 mm.

42 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers

Frequency (%)



4. Data entry and analysis to answer management questions

Studies to determine maturity sizes

Data on the individual size of specimens and stages of reproductive maturity are important for determining 
minimum harvest sizes for fisheries management purposes. However, reproductive maturity information 
requires significant amounts of data collected over a long period of time, or sizes at maturity and spawning 
season information can be gathered from interviews with fishers. Once the size at maturity is known, it is 
important to give the species a minimum of one full spawning year before harvesting is considered. In species 
such as octopus that only breed once, fishers must leave a proportion of the octopus population undisturbed 
in order to ensure a future for the fishery.

Comparisons of size structure among sites

The effectiveness of a management decision, such as an area closure, can be assessed by analysing population 
characteristics (density and size structure) of a selected indicator species and comparing these with an open 
access area within the same site. The example in Figure 20 shows the size structure for sandfish (Holothuria 
scabra) in a no-take area (marine protected area, or MPA) and an open access area (non-MPA) for a Pacific 
Island site. In this example, it is clear that the MPA has more and larger H. scabra (mean size 236 mm) than the 
open access area (non-MPA area). In addition, a higher percentage of the H. scabra population in the MPA is 
larger than the length at maturity (160 mm) than the population in the non-MPA area. This indicates a fishing 
impact in the open access area from which the individuals in the MPA are protected.

MPA
50

Mean = 236 mm Maximum size = 395 mm

40

30

20

10

0

Non-MPA
50

Mean size = 190 mm Maximum size = 405 mm

40

30

20

10

0

Length (mm)

Figure 20. Mean size frequency of Holothuria scabra within a marine protected area (n = 210) and a non-marine 
protected area (n = 46) at a hypothetical site. Mean and maximum sizes are also displayed.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 43

Frequency (%)

0 0

25 25

45 45

65 65

85 85

105 105

125 125

145 145

165 165

185 185

205 205

225 225

245 245

265 265

285 285

305 305

325 325

345 345

365 365

385 385

405 405



4. Data entry and analysis to answer management questions

Estimating total and fishable stock 

Estimating a stock is done by multiplying species density by total area of habitat of interest at a particular site. 
The recommended density to use is the overall mean density, as this is more accurate than using present mean 
density because it is the density for all transects. These calculations can be conducted on data for all habitats, 
but are most accurate when habitat type is taken into account. To estimate stocks, several steps need to be 
performed.

Step 1: Estimate density (as outlined above).

Step 2: Calculate reef or habitat area in hectares. This is done by using GIS and maps of the area of interest.

Step 3: Calculate standing stock and harvestable stock levels. This is derived by multiplying species density 
estimates by reef habitat area of interest, and the result is the total estimated standing stock (total estimated 
number of individuals). For some fisheries, information on sustainable harvest levels are needed (e.g. total 
number of individuals above a minimum harvestable size or total number of individuals between a minimum 
and maximum harvest size limit as used in some trochus fisheries). 

Standing stock and harvestable stock estimates can be converted to biomass to determine production 
quantity. A proportion of this biomass can be proposed as the harvest level (see example in Appendix 7). 

Step 4: Conversion to dry mass. Conversions can be performed from wet weight or wet length to dry weight 
or dry length as necessary in order to better understand changes in quantity or to derive an estimate of the 
economic value of the resource in an area. Standard wet to dry conversion ratios used to perform these 
conversions are provided for sea cucumber species in Appendix 8. The example box below shows how to 
perform this type of calculation. 

Example
Conversion of 200 pieces of wet white teatfish (Holothuria whitmaei) to dry weight. The wet-dry 
conversion ratio of 0.08 or 8% weight retention and mean live weight of 2,500 g per animal are used 
as follows: 
Total dry weight = number of pieces x average live weight (g) x conversion ratio
= (200 x 2,500) x 0.08
= 40,000 g
= 40 kg

Dry weight for 200 pieces of live white teatfish is 40 kg.
Back calculation can be performed to convert dry mass to wet mass. 

Confidence intervals for stock estimation

A confidence interval (CI) is a range of stock estimate figures that is believed to include the true population 
parameter of a species most of the time it is assessed. The 95% confidence limit around the mean suggests that 
if the sampling procedure was repeated many times (e.g. 1,000 times), the calculated interval would include 
the true mean of the average stock estimate 95% of the time (e.g. 950 times out of 1,000). The desired level of 
confidence is set by the researcher (not determined by data) and the common choices for the confidence level 
are 0.90, 0.95 and 0.99. These levels correspond to percentages of the area of the normal distribution curve. 
For example, a 95% CI covers 95% of the normal curve; this means the probability of observing a value outside 
of this area is less than 5%.

Certain factors may affect the confidence interval size including size of sample, level of confidence and 
population variability. A larger sample size normally leads to a better estimate of the population parameter. 
CI gives an estimate of the degree of confidence that the standing stocks are derived from reliable estimates 
that are used from a stock survey. 

44 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



4. Data entry and analysis to answer management questions

The steps and functions to calculate CI using Excel are outlined in Appendix 7.

Survey power
Power analysis is used to calculate the minimum sample size (number of stations or replicates) 
required to detect a change (‘effect size’) within any sampling design. This is useful for conducting 
resource assessments to prevent an undersample (unable to detect change) or oversample (waste 
time and money). 

Factors influencing power

Statistical power may depend on a number of factors. At a minimum, survey power nearly always 
depends on the following three factors:

•	  the statistical significance criterion used in the test;
•	  the magnitude of the effect (or the change in stock size) in the population; and
•	  the sample size used to detect the effect. 

The amount of survey effort required to provide significant power should be considered on a case-by-
case basis. For advice on survey power, please contact SPC’s Coastal Fisheries Programme.

4.3	 Data communication
After surveys have been completed and the resulting data analysed, it is important to present the results 
in a format that is useful to key stakeholders. The actual data and analyses are more relevant to scientific 
audiences, but for community consultative meetings it may be more effective to communicate by talking and 
using visual presentations (e.g. advisory sheets, posters) than through written reports. 

Where relevant, it is essential to communicate the survey results with community leaders such as chiefs, 
resource custodians and religious leaders, who can interpret the results of the monitoring efforts, and 
explain the value of management actions to the broader community. The steps in this process should include 
identifying the:

•	 target audience;
•	 key messages to get across and when; and
•	 communication products that will best suit the needs of the project (many products may be required for 

different audiences).

Writing a resource survey report

A resource survey report should follow the typical scientific report format as outlined below. 

Title 
The title should be concise and give clear indication of the survey. 

Acknowledgement
Acknowledge the people, funding bodies etc that provided support for the assessment.

Abstract or summary
The abstract or summary of the survey summarises the whole report, usually in a page or less, and usually 
includes introductory statements, objective, methods, results and findings and brief conclusions and 
recommendations. 

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 45



4. Data entry and analysis to answer management questions

Introduction
Background information of the fishery that is being assessed, relevance of the fishery to the economy of the 
country, fishing activities, livelihood, production, exports, current knowledge, past resources assessments, 
current management practices and the purpose of the survey. 

Methods 
The methods section outlines the location of the survey, data collection methods and how the data were 
analysed. This section should include enough detail to allow the reader to replicate the work.

Results
The results section contains a series of figures and tables with text to explain the findings presented in the 
figures. 

Discussion and recommendations
Discussion and recommendations sections often go together. This Section is dedicated to recommendations 
preferably in dot point format to clearly explain the findings and their implications on the fishery based on 
current management measures. Recommendations for alternative management measures to improve the 
situation can be included.

References
List of all studies referenced in the report.

Appendix / Annex
Supplementary or supporting information that are relevant to the report but would be too lengthy to include 
in the report itself.

46 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



5. Further readings

Resource surveys

English S., Wilkinson C. and Baker V. (eds). 1997. Survey manual for tropical marine 
resources. 2nd ed. Australian Institute of Marine Science, Townsville, Australia. 390 p.

Fletcher W.J. and Amos M. 1994. Stock assessment and management of coconut crabs 
(Birgus latro): A manual. Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research 
Monograph Series no. 29. 32 p.

Pinca S., Kronen M., Friedman K., Magron F., Chapman L., Tardy E., Pakoa K., Awira R., 
Boblin P. and Lasi F. 2010. Regional assessment report: Profiles and results from survey 
work at 63 sites across 17 Pacific Island countries and territories. Pacific Regional Oceanic 
and Coastal Fisheries Development Programme (PROCFish/C/CoFish). Noumea, New 
Caledonia: Secretariat of the Pacific Community. 467 p.

Species identification

Purcell S.W., Samyn Y. and Conand C. 2012. Commercially important sea cucumbers of 
the world. FAO Species Catalogue for Fishery purposes. No. 6. Rome, Italy: Food and 
Agricultural Organization. 223 p.

Purcell S.W., Tardy E., Desurmont A. and Friedman K.J. 2008. Commercial holothurians 
of the tropical Pacific [Poster]. Noumea, New Caledonia: Secretariat of the Pacific 
Community.
[http://www.spc.int/DigitalLibrary/Doc/FAME/Posters/Holothurians.pdf]

Anon. 2007. Marine invertebrates of the Pacific Islands [Poster]. Noumea, New Caledonia: 
Secretariat of the Pacific Community.
[http://www.spc.int/DigitalLibrary/Doc/FAME/Posters/Invertebrates.pdf]

Anon. 2004. Pacific Island sea cucumber and beche-de-mer identification cards. Noumea, 
New Caledonia: Secretariat of the Pacific Community.
[http://www.spc.int/DigitalLibrary/Doc/FAME/Manuals/Anon_04_ID_BDM.pdf]

Anon. 2012. Guide & Information sheets for fishing communities (2nd edition). Noumea, 
New Caledonia: Secretariat of the Pacific Community.
[http://www.spc.int/DigitalLibrary/Doc/FAME/Manuals/Anon_12_Guide_Leaflet_
InfoSheetsForCommunities.pdf]

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 47



5. Further readings

Application of methods in this manual

Assessing sea cucumber stock status from manta tow and reef transect information. Friedman K., Eriksson 
H., Tardy E. and Pakoa K. 2011. Management of sea cucumber stocks: Patterns of vulnerability and recovery of 
sea cucumber stocks impacted by fishing. Fish and Fisheries 12:75–93. 

Assessing sea cucumber stock status from manta tow surveys. Eriksson H., de la Torre-Castro M., Eklöf J. 
and Jiddawi N. 2010. Resource degradation of the sea cucumber fishery in Zanzibar, Tanzania: A need for 
management reform. Aquatic Living Resources 23:387–398.

Determining sea cucumber stock health. Friedman K., Purcell S., Bell J. and Hair C. 2008. Sea cucumber fisheries: 
A manager’s toolbox. ACIAR Monograph No. 135. Canberra. Australian Centre for International Agriculture 
Research. 32 pp.

Assessing a single sea cucumber species using manta tow and reef transect surveys. Eriksson H., Thorne 
B.V. and Byrne M. 2013. Population metrics in protected commercial sea cucumber populations (curryfish: 
Stichopus herrmanni) on One Tree Reef, Great Barrier Reef. Marine Ecological Progress Series 473:225–234.

Sea cucumber resources status assessment. Tardy E. and Pakoa K. 2009. The status of sea cucumbers in Yap 
State, Federated States of Micronesia. Noumea, New Caledonia: Secretariat of the Pacific Community. 68 p.

Sea cucumber resources status assessment. Pakoa K., Lasi F., Tardy E. and Friedman K. 2009. The status of 
sea cucumbers exploited by Palau’s subsistence fishery. Noumea, New Caledonia: Secretariat of the Pacific 
Community. 44 p.

Trochus resources status assessment. Tardy E., Pakoa K. and Friedman K. 2008. Assessment of the trochus 
resources of Pohnpei Island and recommendations for management. Noumea, New Caledonia: Secretariat of 
the Pacific Community. 63 p.

Trochus resources status assessment. Tardy E., Pakoa K. and Friedman K. 2008. Assessment of the trochus 
resources of Kosrae Island and recommendations for management. Noumea, New Caledonia: Secretariat of 
the Pacific Community. 56 p.

48 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 1. Measuring sizes of 
various macroinvertebrates

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 49



IDENTIFICATION cards for marine  
invertebrate surveys IN THE PACIFIC ISLANDS

Measurements Tools
Bivalves

Giant clam Longest length Caliper
Ruler

Oyster 1: Distance from hinge to opposite edge Caliper
1 2

2: Shell width Ruler

Ark shell Shell width Caliper
(Anadara sp.) Ruler

Penguin’s wing Umbo-ventral length Caliper
(Pteria penguin) Ruler

Gastropods

Sea hare Total length Caliper
Ruler

Trochus Basal diameter (measure across the base Caliper
of the shell) Ruler

Cone shell Total length Caliper
Ruler

Triton shell Total length Caliper
Ruler

Strombus shell Total length Caliper
Ruler

Conch shell Total length (end of shell to end Caliper
(Lambis chiragra) of furtherest spike) Ruler

Turban snail Longest width (end of apex to end of outer Caliper
(Turbo setosus) edge of whorl opening) Ruler

50 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Measurements Tools
Gastropods

Green snail Longest width Caliper
Ruler

Cowry shell Total length Caliper
Ruler

Cerith  Total length Caliper
(Cerithium sp.) Ruler

Cephalopods

Octopus Mantle height Ruler

Echinoderms

Sea cucumber Length Ruler

Sea urchin Length without spines Caliper
Ruler

Crustaceans

1: Length from front edge of carapace to 
Spiny lobster rear edge of telson Caliper

2: Carapace length Ruler

2
1

Slipper lobster 1: Total length Caliper
2: Length from eyeline to front of telson Ruler

2
1

Coconut crab 1: Cephalo-thoracic length (CL) Caliper
1

2 2: Thoracic length (TL) Ruler

Mangrove crab Carapace width Ruler
Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 51

© Copyright Secretariat of the Pacific Community, 2013



52 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 2. Safety during 
in-water surveys

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 53



Safety Checklist 
for underwater survey work

PLANNING:
yy Designateyayteamyleaderywhoyshould yy Safelyystowyobjectsyonboard
yyyyyyyycoordinateyplanning yy Ensureytheyboatyoperatoryknowsytheywhereaboutsyofyallydiversyandy
yy Teamyleaderytoydelegateytasksyandymake beyalertyforyotheryswimmersyandyfishersyinytheywatery
yyyyyyyydecisions yy Stayyawayyfromyascendingydiversy(10ymyatyleast);ymoveyinywheny
yy Allocateypersonalygearytoyusersyfor theyyhaveysurfacedy
yyyyyyyyindividualyresponsibilityy yy Positionytheyboatyintoytheywindyandyswellsyinyallyoperationsy

yy Establishyayworkyplanyandydiscussywithyyteamymembers yy Ensureythereyisyanyassistantyonboardytoyhelpydiversybackyintoytheyboat
yy Designateyaycontactypersonywhoyknowsytheyworkyplan yy Doynotyleaveyboatyunattendedyorymoveyawayyfromyworkysite
yy Studyytheysurveyylocationyusingymapsyandylocalyinformation yy Ensureythatyenoughyfoodyandywateryisyonboardyinycaseyofydelayedy
yy Ensureyyouyhaveyeffectiveycommunicationybyyradioyorymobileyphone returny
yy Arrangeysecureypackingyofygearyandymaterialsy

DIVE EQUIPMENT:
DIVING CREDENTIALS AND INSURANCE:

yy Ensureyallyequipmentyisyservicedy
yy Checkythatyallydiversyhaveyayminimum yyyyyyyyregularlyy
yyyyyyyyyopenywaterylevelycertificationy yy Packyanyadditionalysetyofyequipment
yy Onlyyallowyactiveydiversywhoyhaveydived yy Checkygearyforyproperyfityandyleakage;
yyyyyyyyyinytheylasty6ymonthsytoyparticipate yyyyyyyreplaceywithyspareysetyifyfaulty
yy Checkythatyallydiversyhaveyinsuranceyand yy Ensureydiversyknowytheiryweightysystemy
yyyyyyyyyayvalidyannualymedicalyclearanceytoydive yy CheckyregulatoryandyBCDyforyleaksyandytrappedyhose

yy Ensureyyouycanycontactytheylocalyemergencyyagencyy yy Beyfamiliarywithyyouryequipment;yavoidysubservicedyandy
yy Ensureysomeoneyinytheygroupyknowsyrelevantyfirstyaidyprocedures unfamiliarygear

yy Keepyfragileyequipmentyinycasesyoutyofysunyandysaltwaterywheny
WEATHER AND GENERAL CONDITIONS: notyinyuse

yy Monitorydailyyweatheryforecasts
yy Seekylocalyadviceywhereynecessary BEFORE-DIVE CHECKS:
yy Planyactivitiesyaccordingytoydailyyweather yy Checkythatyyourybuddy’sygearyisyinygood
yyyyyyyyconditionsyandytidalychangesy yyyyyyyyordery
yy Avoidydivingyinyroughyseasyandystrong yy Secure,ywithinyeasyyreach,yayspare
yyyyyyyytidalycurrents yyyyyyyyoctopus,yregulatoryandydiveycomputery

yy Alwaysydiveyinytheysameydirectionyasytheycurrenty yy Testyairysupply,ycheckyweightysystemyand
yy Inychannelsyalwaysydiveyintoytheylagoony yyyyyyyydepthygaugeybeforeyandyonydescent
yy Avoidyareasyofypooryvisibilityy yy Beyclearyonyyourydiveyplanybeforeyenteringywater;yaskyifyyouyarey

unsure
HEALTH: yy Ensureyyourywritingyslateyisyinyorderyandypencilyandyrecordysheety

areyready
yy Doynotydiveyifyyouyhaveyayheadycoldyor

yy Ensureyallydiversyhaveybasicyunderstandingyofystandardydiveysigny
yyyyyyyyareynotyfeelingywelly

language
yy Changeydailyyplansytoysuitytheyneedsyofy
yyyyyyyytheyteamyyifynecessary

y
yy Keepyaymedicalykityonboardy UNDERWATER:
yy Ensureyatyleastytwoyteamymembersyhave
yyyyyyyybasicyfirstyaidyskillsy yy Neverydiveyaloney

yy Don’tydiveyunderyinfluenceyofyalcoholyorydrugs,yevenytheynightybefore yy Maintainytheysameydepthyasyyourybuddy
yy Haveyoxygenyequipmentyonyboardywhenydivingytoydepthsyofy yyyyyyyyandystayywithinyviewyofyeachyothery
yyyyyyyovery40ymy yy Stayyfocusedyandydoynotystrayyfromythe

yyyyyyyydiveyplan
BOAT SAFETY: yy Signalyimmediatelyyifyyouysenseya

yyyyyyyyproblemy(e.g.ytiredness,yairyrunningylow,ygearyfailure)
yy Ensureytheyboatyisyaysuitableysizeyand yy Adjustyyouryweightybeltyandybuoyancyysystemy
yyyyyyyydesignyforytheyworkyplan yy Fixyproblemsyasysoonyasytheyyhappen,ydon’tyletythemybuildyup
yy Checkythatyallybasicysafetyygearyisyonboard yy Ifyyouyloseyyourybuddy,ystopyworkyandylookyaroundytheyareayfory2y
yyyyyyyy(seeySPCyseaysafetyybooklet)y minutes;yifyyouycannotylocateyyourybuddy,yascendysafelyyandyalerty
yy Checkyengineyandykeepyadditionalyfuel theyboatyoperator
yyyyyyyyonboard,ycrosscheckywithyoperator



Safety Checklist 
for underwater survey work

USING A COMPRESSOR: ACCIDENT:
yy Aypersonyshouldybeyinychargeyofythe yy Implementyresponsesytoyaccidentsythat

yyyyycompressor youyhaveypracticed.ye.g.ythrowylife-float
yy Ensureytheymachineyisyservicedybefore yyyyyytoyvictim

goingyintoytheyfield yy Ensureythatytheyprocessyofyassisting
yy Secureysufficientyfuelytoyrunythe ytheyvictimydoesynotyendangerytheylifeyof

compressory yotheryteamymembersy
yy Checkyforycleanyairybeforeyrefillingy yy Workyoutyayplanyofyactionywithytheyothersyonboard
yy Takeycareyofyytheymachineyandykeepyayspareyoneyifynecessary yy Bringytheyboatycloserytoytheyvictim,yextendyanythingyavailableytoy

reachytheyvictim

DETECTING PROBLEMS: yy Placeytheydiverygentlyyinyaycomfortableypositionyonboard
yy CommenceyABCychecksy(airway,ybreathing,ycirculation)y

yy Observeyyourselfyandyyourybuddy yy Allocateytasksytoyteamymembers
yyyyyyyyregularlyyforysignsyofyproblems yy Alertyrelevantyauthoritiesyforyassistanceyasysoonyasypossible
yy Signsyofyproblemsyinclude:yrapid yy Recordychangesyinyconditionyofydistressedydiver,yactivitiesyandytimey
yyyyyyyybreathing,ynoyresponseytoysignals, ofyevents
yyyyyyyyawkwardykicking,ytearsyinyeyes,yeyesywide
yyyyyyyyopen,yyjerkyymovements,yusingyarmsyto AFTER DIVE CHECKS:

yyyyyyyyswim,yejectingymaskyandyregulator,yboltingytoytheysurface
yy Onytheysurface,yproblemsyinclude:ylaggingybehind,ychoking,y yy Removeygearyandysafelyystowyity

coughing,yvomiting,ymovingytheyheadyback,ytreadingyhighyoutyofy yy Putyfragileyequipmenty–yGPS,ycomputers,
theywater,yusingyhandsyandyarms,yandynoysnorkelyoryregulatoryiny ymask,ycameray–yinycases

yyyyyyyytheymouth yy Turnyoffydiveytanksyonboardyandykeep

y yytanksysecureywhenytheyboatyisymoving

ASCENDING: yy Avoidyfreeydivingyimmediatelyyafterya
yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyydeepydive

yy Alwaysyascendytogether;yfollow yy Wearyaywindybreakeryonycoldyandywindyydaysy
yyyyyyyydecompressionystopyrulesy yy Checkythatyallydatayareyrecordedybeforeyleavingyaysite
yy Ascendyupytheywallyfaceyifynearyayreefywall yy Ensureysafeykeepingyofycompletedyrecordysheets
yy Alwaysyfaceyyourybuddyywhen yy Doynotytravelybyyplaneywithiny24yhoursyofycompletingyaydive
yyyyyyyyascendingyinymid-water
yy Stayycloserytogetheryinylow-visibilityywatersy GENERAL CONDUCT:

yy Ifyusingyaysausageyfloat,yuseyexhaledyairytoyfillytheysausage
yy Inydeepydives,ykeepyspareyscubaytanksyandyregulatoryatyleast yy Seekypermissionyfromytheycommunity
yyyyyyy10–15ymybelowytheyboat yandylocalyauthoritiesyforyaccessytoyworkysite
yy Alwaysycheckyaboveyforytheyboatyoryobjectsybeforeysurfacing yy Useyaylocalyguideyatyallytimesyandyfollow
yy Keepywatchyonytheyboatywhenymovingycloseryandygettingyonboardy yyyyyhisyoryheryinstructions
yy Beycarefulywhenyremovingyweightybelts,yasytheyycanyfallyoffyeasily yy Respectylocalyrules,ycodeyofyconductyand

yculturallyysignificantysites

ENVIRONMENTAL DANGERS: yy Teamyleaderyisyresponsibleyforymaintainingyorderyatyallytimes
yy Maintainygoodybehaviour

yy Avoidyactionsythatyattractysharksysuchyas yy Ensureygoodycommunicationyisymaintainedyatyallytimesy
yyyyyyyyfishing:yystayyawayyfromyfishersy
yy Wearyfullywetsuits,ybootsyandyglovesyfor
yyyyyyyymaximumyprotectiony
yy Followyylocalyadvicey
yy Doynotytouchyanythingyifyunsurey

yy Stayyawayyfromyestuariesyandymurkyywatersyinycountriesywhere
yyyyyyyycrocodilesyareyendemic

This Safety Checklist should be used alongside:
The SPC Manual for Safety at Sea, a scuba dive regulation manual, and any marine environmental safety guide.

© Secretariat of the Pacific Community, 2011. Illustrations by Jipé Le-Bars
Produced by the Coastal Fisheries Science and Management Section



56 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 3. Species 
identification guides

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 57



Identification cards for marine invertebrate surveys in the Pacific Islands

BIVALVES
Arcidae Cardiidae

© Pierre Peries © Pierre Peries © Pierre Peries © Pierre Peries © National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands

Anadara antiquata Arca ventricosa Fragum fragum Fragum unedo Fulvia laevigata

© Kalo Pakoa © BMR © National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands © Kalo Pakoa © Nicolas Kietler

Hippopus hippopus Hippopus porcellanus Lyrocardium lyratum Tridacna crocea Tridacna derasa

© Kalo Pakoa © Eugen Zeissi © BMR © Babou Côté Océan, Thierry Baboulenne © National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands

Tridacna gigas Tridacna maxima Tridacna squamosa Tridacna tevoroa Vasticardium angulatum

Carditidae Chamidae

© Pierre Peries © National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands © National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands © Shells passion © Bill Franck

Vasticardium elongatum Vasticardium flavum Beguina semiorbiculata Chama croceata Chama macerophylla

Donacidae Gryphaeidae Lucinidae

© National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands © Udo Schmidt © Udo Schmidt © Pierre Peries © Pierre Peries

Chama pacifica Donax cuneatus Donax faba Hyotissa hyotis Codakia punctata

Mesodesmatidae Mytilidae

© Pierre Peries © Ellen Bulger © National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands © National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands © National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands

Codakia tigerina Fimbria fimbriata Atactodea striata Lithophaga spp. Modiolus auriculatus

Pectinidae Pinnidae

© National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands © Bill Franck © National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands © Pierre Peries © Pierre Peries

Septifer bilocularis Chlamys spp. Atrina vexillum Pinna bicolor Pinna muricata



BIVALVES

Psammobiidae Pteriidae

© National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands © Anne DuPont © Mary Buckstel © National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands © Jan Messersmith

Asaphis violascens Pinctada imbricata Pinctada margaritifera Pinctada maxima Pteria penguin

Spondylidae Tellinidae

© National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands © National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands © National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands © Pierre Peries © National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands

Spondylus sinensis Spondylus squamosus Spondylus varius Tellina palatum Tellina scobinata

Veneridae

© Pierre Peries © Shells passion © Pierre Peries © National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands © National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands

Gafrarium pectinatum Lioconcha annettae Lioconcha castrensis Lioconcha fastigiata Periglypta puerpera

© National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands © Pierre Peries © Femorale.com © Ellen Bulger © National History Museum Rotterdam, Netherlands

Periglypta reticulata Pitar hebraeus Pitar prora Tapes literatus Timoclea marica

© Copyright Secretariat of the Pacific Community, 2013



Identification cards for marine invertebrate surveys in the Pacific Islands

CRUSTACEANS

Calappidae Carpiliidae Coenobitidae

© Ria Tan, Wildsingapore © Ria Tan, Wildsingapore © WJ Chen

Calappa spp. Carpilius maculatus Birgus latro

Diogenidae Eriphiidae

© Marc Proudfoot © Ria Tan, Wildsingapore © Crusta, Joseph Poupin

Coenobita perlatus Dardanus spp. Eriphia sebana

Gecarcinidae Grapsidae

© Yuji © B. Navez © Nicolas Clerton

Cardisoma spp. Cardisoma spp. Metopograpsus messor

Lysiosquillidae Ocypodidae Odontodactylidae

© Silke Baron © Drew Avery © Jens Petersen

Lysiosquillina maculata Ocypode ceratophthalmus Odontodactylus scyllarus

Palaemonidae Palinuridae

© Jarek Tuszynski © Chan Tin-Yam © Crusta, Joseph Poupin

Macrobrachium rosenbergii Panulirus femoristriga Panulirus homarus



CRUSTACEANS

Palinuridae

© Crusta, Joseph Poupin © Crusta, Norbert Verneau © Crusta, Joseph Poupin

Panulirus longipes Panulirus ornatus Panulirus penicillatus

Penaeidae Portunidae

© Chan Tan-Yam © Crusta, Joseph Poupin © Simon Pu

Panulirus versicolor Penaeus monodon Scylla paramamosain

Scyllaridae

© Richard Ling © Crusta, Joseph Poupin © Chan Tan-Yam

Scylla serrata Thalamita crenata Parribacus antarcticus

© Crusta, Richer De Forges © Crusta, Joseph Poupin © Crusta, Joseph Poupin

Parribacus caledonicus Parribacus holthuisi Parribacus scarlatinus

Sesarmidae Thalassinidae Xanthidae

© Denis Riek © Ria Tan, Wildsingapore © Bernard Dupont

Parasesarma erythodactyla Thalassina anomala Etisus splendidus

© Copyright Secretariat of the Pacific Community, 2013



Identification cards for marine invertebrate surveys in the Pacific Islands

ECHINODERMS – SEA CUCUMBERS
Actinopyga

© Kim Friedman © Steve Purcell © Poasi Ngaluafe

Actinopyga caerulea Actinopyga echinites / Deepwater redfish Actinopyga flammea / Spiky deepwater redfish

© Kalo Pakoa

© Steve Purcell

© Aymeric Desurmont

© Kalo Pakoa © Pierre Laboute

Actinopyga lecanora / Stonefish Actinopyga mauritiana / Surf redfish Actinopyga miliaris / Hairy blackfish

© Steve Purcell © Kalo Pakoa © Steve Purcell

Actinopyga palauensis / Deepwater blackfish Actinopyga sp. / Hairy greyfish Actinopyga spinea / Burying blackfish

Bohadschia

© Steve Purcell © Kalo Pakoa © Steve Purcell

Bohadschia argus / Leopardfish Bohadschia argus / Leopardfish Bohadschia similis / Chalkfish

© Steve Purcell © Kalo Pakoa © Kalo Pakoa

Bohadschia vitiensis / Brown sandfish Bohadschia vitiensis / Brown sandfish Bohadschia vitiensis / Brown sandfish

Holothuria

© Kalo Pakoa

© Steve Purcell © Steve Purcell © Kalo Pakoa

Holothuria atra / Lollyfish - Reef lollyfish Holothuria coluber / Snakefish Holothuria coronopertusa



ECHINODERMS – SEA CUCUMBERS

© Kalo Pakoa

© Steve Purcell © Steve Purcell © Kalo Pakoa

Holothuria edulis / Pinkfish Holothuria flavomaculata / Red snakefish Holothuria fuscogilva / White teatfish

© Steve Purcell © Steve Purcell © Steve Purcell

Holothuria fuscopunctata / Elephant trunkfish Holothuria lessoni / Golden sandfish Holothuria leucospilota / White threadsfish

Pearsonothuria

© Kalo Pakoa

© Steve Purcell © Steve Purcell © Steve Purcell

Holothuria scabra / Sandfish Holothuria whitmaei / Black teatfish Pearsonothuria graeffei / Flowerfish

Stichopus

© Emmanuel Tardy © Kalo Pakoa © Emmanuel Tardy

Stichopus chloronotus / Greenfish Stichopus herrmanni / Curryfish Stichopus horrens / Dragonfish

© Kalo Pakoa © Kim Friedman © Kalo Pakoa

Stichopus horrens / Dragonfish Stichopus vastus / Brown curryfish Stichopus vastus / Brown curryfish

Thelenota

© Steve Purcell © Emmanuel Tardy © Kim Friedman

Thelenota ananas / Prickly redfish Thelenota anax / Amberfish Thelenota rubralineata / Lemonfish

© Copyright Secretariat of the Pacific Community, 2013



Identification cards for marine invertebrate surveys in the Pacific Islands

ECHINODERMS – SEA STARS
Acanthasteridae Asteropseidae Comasteridae

© Emmanuel Tardy © David R © Rainer Leidner

Acanthaster planci Valvaster striatus Comaster nobilis

Goniasteridae Ophidiasteridae

© Allerina and Glen MacLarty © Sandrine Job © Sandrine Job

Anchitosia queenslandensis Fromia monilis Linckia laevigata

© Florent Charpin © Dwayne Meadows © François Michonneau

Linckia laevigata Linckia multifora Nardoa novaecaledoniae

Ophiothrichidae Oreasteridae

© Ria Tan, Wildsingapore © Jan Messersmith © Kalo Pakoa

Ophiothrix spp. Choriaster granulatus Culcita novaeguineae

Tropiometridae

© Karel Jakubec © Ria Tan, Wildsingapore © Lyle Vail

Protoreaster nodosus Protoreaster nodosus Tropiometra afra



ECHINODERMS – SEA URCHINS
Cidaridae Diadematidae

© François Michonneau © WJ Chen © Michael Wolf

Phyllacanthus imperialis Diadema savignyi Diadema setosum

Echinometridae

© Ken Ichi © Shawn Miller © Andreas Kroh

Echinothrix calamaris Echinothrix diadema Echinometra mathaei

© Pauline Bosserelle © US Fish & Wildlife Service © David Burdick

Echinostrephus aciculatus Heterocentrotus mamillatus Heterocentrotus trigonarius

Parasaleniidae Strongylocentrotidae Temnopleuridae

© Kee Alfian © Jerry Kirkhart © Ron DeCloux

Parasalenia gratiosa Strongylocentrotus purpuratus Mespilia globulus

Toxopneustidae

© Loh Kok Sheng © Nick Hobgood © Emmanuel Tardy

Salmacis belli Toxopneustes pileolus Tripneustes gratilla

© Copyright Secretariat of the Pacific Community, 2013



Identification cards for marine invertebrate surveys in the Pacific Islands

GASTROPODS
Bursidae Cassidae Cerithiidae Conidae

© Richard Parker © Shadowshador © Shadowshador © David Beales, University of Hawaii Museum Consortium © H.-R. Siegel, Musée d’histoire naturelle Fribourg, Suisse

Tutufa bubo Tutufa rubeta Cassis cornuta Cerithium nodulosum Conus leopardus

Coralliophilidae

© H.-R. Siegel, Musée d’histoire naturelle Fribourg, Suisse © David Beales, University of Hawaii Museum Consortium © David Beales, University of Hawaii Museum Consortium © David Beales, University of Hawaii Museum Consortium © Shadowshador

Conus litteratus Conus marmoreus Conus miles Conus vexillum Coralliophila violacea

Cypraeidae Fasciolariidae

© David Beales, University of Hawaii Museum Consortium © David Beales, University of Hawaii Museum Consortium © Pierre Peries © Jacksonville Shell Club © Shadowshador

Cypraea annulus Cypraea caputserpentis Cypraea tigris Latirolagena smaragdula Pleuroploca filamentosa

Mitridae Muricidae

© Shadowshador © David Beales, University of Hawaii Museum Consortium © Shadowshador © Shadowshador © Shadowshador

Pleuroploca trapezium Mitra mitra Chicoreus ramosus Drupa morum Drupa rubusidaeus

© David Beales, University of Hawaii Museum Consortium © David Beales, University of Hawaii Museum Consortium © Richard Parker © David Beales, University of Hawaii Museum Consortium © Richard Parker

Morula granulata Morula uva Nassa francolina Nassa serta Reishia armigera

Nassariidae

© Pierre Peries © Pierre Peries © David Beales, University of Hawaii Museum Consortium © Shadowshador © Shadowshador

Thais aculeata Thais bitubercularis Thais intermedia Thais tuberosa Nassarius spp.

Naticidae Neritidae

© David Beales, University of Hawaii Museum Consortium © Shadowshador © Pierre Peries © David Beales, University of Hawaii Museum Consortium © Udo Schmidt

Mammilla melanostoma Polinices mammilla Nerita albicilla Nerita plicata Nerita polita



GASTROPODS
Olividae Ovulidae Potamididae

© Pierre Peries © Pierre Peries © Pierre Peries © Udo Schmidt © Pierre Peries

Oliva caerulea Oliva miniacea Ovula ovum Telescopium telescopium Terebralia palustris

Ranellidae Seraphsidae Strombidae

© David Beales, University of Hawaii Museum Consortium © H.-R. Siegel, Musée d’histoire naturelle Fribourg, Suisse © Shadowshador © Shadowshador © Shadowshador

Charonia tritonis Terebellum terebellum Lambis chiragra Lambis crocata Lambis lambis

© Shadowshador © Shadowshador © H.-R. Siegel, Musée d’histoire naturelle Fribourg, Suisse © Udo Schmidt © Shadowshador

Lambis millepeda Lambis scorpius Lambis truncata Strombus chrysostomus Strombus gibberulus

Tegulidae 

© Bill Franck © Pierre Peries © Shadowshador © Bill Franck © H.-R. Siegel, Musée d’histoire naturelle Fribourg, Suisse

Strombus latissimus Strombus luhuanus Strombus mutabilis Strombus thersites Tectus niloticus

Terebridae Tonnidae Trochidae

© H.-R. Siegel, Musée d’histoire naturelle Fribourg, Suisse © Richard Parker © David Beales, University of Hawaii Museum Consortium © David Beales, University of Hawaii Museum Consortium © H.-R. Siegel, Musée d’histoire naturelle Fribourg, Suisse

Tectus pyramis Terebra dimidiata Terebra maculata Tonna perdix Trochus maculatus

Turbinellidae Turbinidae

© Richard Parker © Shadowshador © H.-R. Siegel, Musée d’histoire naturelle Fribourg, Suisse © H.-R. Siegel, Musée d’histoire naturelle Fribourg, Suisse © H.-R. Siegel, Musée d’histoire naturelle Fribourg, Suisse

Vasum ceramicum Vasum turbinellus Astralium rhodostomum Turbo argyrostomus Turbo chrysostomus

Vermetidae

© Kalo Pakoa © H.-R. Siegel, Musée d’histoire naturelle Fribourg, Suisse © Shadowshador © H.-R. Siegel, Musée d’histoire naturelle Fribourg, Suisse © Kalo Pakoa

Turbo crassus Turbo marmoratus Turbo petholatus Turbo setosus Dendropoma maximum

© Copyright Secretariat of the Pacific Community, 2013



Identification cards for marine invertebrate surveys in the Pacific Islands

ALGAE AND SEAGRASS
Caulerpaceae

© Sabine Penisson - www.aquareefphoto.com © Serge Andréfoüet © Ria Tan, Wildsingapore

Caulerpa bikinensis Caulerpa pickeringii Caulerpa racemosa

© Ria Tan, Wildsingapore © Ria Tan, Wildsingapore © Serge Andréfoüet

Caulerpa serrulata Caulerpa sertularioides Caulerpa seuratii

Codiaceae

© Ria Tan, Wildsingapore © Serge Andréfoüet © Claude Payri

Caulerpa taxifolia Caulerpa urvilleana Codium edule

Corallinaceae Cymodoceaceae

© University of Guam © Ria Tan, Wildsingapore © Ria Tan, Wildsingapore

Jania tenella Halodule uninervis Syringodium isoetifolium

Dictyotaceae

© Claude Payri © Kalo Pakoa © Kalo Pakoa

Dictyota acutiloba Padina australis Padina sanctae-crucis



ALGAE AND SEAGRASS
Galaxauraceae Gracilariaceae Halimedaceae

© Derek Keats © Ria Tan, Wildsingapore © Claude Payri

Galaxaura rugosa Gracilaria salicornia Halimeda opuntia

Hydrocharitaceae

© Claude Payri © Ria Tan, Wildsingapore © Ria Tan, Wildsingapore

Halimeda taenicola Enhalus acoroides Halophila ovalis

Oscillatoriaceae

© Ria Tan, Wildsingapore © Alan Cressler © Bradley Moore

Thalassia hemprichii Thalassia testudinum Lyngbya spp.

Sargassaceae

© Jeffrey Low © J. Smith © Claude Payri

Sargassum aquifolium Sargassum obtusifolium Sargassum spinuligerum

Udoteaceae Valoniaceae

© Claude Payri © Rainer Leidner © Sarah Faulwetter

Turbinaria ornata Chlorodesmis fastigiata Valonia aegagropila

© Copyright Secretariat of the Pacific Community, 2013



Identification cards for marine invertebrate surveys in the Pacific Islands

TYPES OF HABITAT
Topography / Complexity

© Pierre Boblin © Pierre Boblin © Sandrine Job

High topography Low topography / Low complexity High complexity

Type of substrate

© Sandrine Job © Sandrine Job © Sandrine Job

Rubble Consolidated rubble Pavement

© Sandrine Job © Sandrine Job

Sand Silt

Corals

© Sandrine Job © Sandrine Job © Sandrine Job

Live coral Soft coral Encrusting coral

© Sandrine Job © Sandrine Job © Steve Martin

Dead coral Bleaching coral Crown-of-thorns feeding scar



TYPES OF HABITAT
Others

© Ferral Lasi © Kalo Pakoa © Derek Keats

Algae Coralline algae Crustose coralline algae (CCA)

© Barry Fackler © Paul Asman and Jill Lenoble © Kalo Pakoa

Fungids / Mushroom coral Seagrass Sponge

Prepared by the Coastal Fisheries Science and Management and the Fisheries Information Sections  
of the Secretariat of the Pacific Community.

Produced with the financial support of the European Union, through the SciCOFISH Project.  
The contents of this publication are the sole responsibility of SPC and can in no way  

be taken to reflect the views of the European Union.

Printed by Stredder Print Ltd, New Zealand.

 

SciCOFish
SCIENTIFIC SUPPORT FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF COASTAL
AND OCEANIC FISHERIES IN THE PACIFIC ISLANDS REGION

© Copyright Secretariat of the Pacific Community, 2013



72 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 4. Species of interest 
and assessing species not 

targeted by the Secretariat of 
the Pacific Community surveys

This appendix contains information on key representative invertebrate species as 
indicators for stock status assessments. Included is a description of each species and its 
geographical distribution, its feeding, its habitat preferences andaggregation on the reef, 
its depth range, its reproduction, its maximum size recorded, its recommended harvest 
size range, its healthy density reference point, and the recommended survey methods.

The species (or species groups) of interest are presented in the following order.

Gastropods (marine snails)

•	 Trochus (Tectus niloticus, formerly Trochus niloticus) 
•	 Green snail (Turbo marmoratus) 
•	 Turban snail (Turbo setosus)

Specimen and handicraft shells

Echinoderms 

Sea cucumbers
•	 Lollyfish and reef lollyfish (Holothuria atra)
•	 Tigerfish or leopardfish (Bohadschia argus)
•	 Black teatfish (Holothuria whitmaei)
•	 Sandfish (Holothuria scabra)
•	 Hairy blackfish (Actinopyga miliaris) 
•	 Surf redfish (Actinopyga mauritiana)
•	 White teatfish (Holothuria fuscogilva) 

Other echinoderms
•	 Striped sea urchin or collector urchin (Tripneustes gratilla)
•	 Crown-of-thorns starfish (Acanthaster planci)

Bivalves

Giant clams
•	 Elongate giant clam (Tridacna maxima) 
•	 Boring giant clam or crosus clam (Tridacna crocea) 

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 73



Appendix 4

•	 Fluted giant clam (Tridacna squamosa), smooth giant clam (Tridacna derasa) and true giant clam (Tridacna 
gigas)

•	 Bear paw giant clam (Hippopus hippopus) 

Other bivalves 
•	 Cockle or ark shells (Anadara spp.) (other infaunal species, such as Gafrarium spp.)

Crustaceans

•	 Spiny rock lobsters (Panulirus spp.) 
•	 Slipper lobsters (Scyllaridae)
•	 Coconut crab (Birgus latro)
•	 Mangrove crab (Scylla serrata)
•	 Land crabs (Cardisoma hiritipes, C. carnifex)

Cephalopods

•	 Octopuses

Full names and abreviations of survey methods used in this manual.

Broad-scale survey methods Fine-scale survey methods
Manta tow Manta tow Reef benthos transect RBt
Reef-front timed swim RFs Soft benthos transect SBt
Reef-front timed walk RFw Shallow water scuba transect SWSt
Shallow-water timed scuba search SWSs Soft infaunal quadrat SiQ
Deepwater timed scuba search DWSs Lobster night search LNs
Sea cucumber night search SCNs Baited coconut Crab bait

Legend illustrating density used in this manual.

 Highest density  Low density

 Moderate density  Absent (rare)

Standardised terminology for habitat descriptions used in this manual.

74 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 4

Gastropods (marine snails)
Many marine snails are of commercial value but trochus (Tectus niloticus) and green snail (Turbo marmoratus) 
are of particular importance to shell export industries. Trochus has been widely introduced across the Pacific, 
while green snail has a narrow distribution range, spanning Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu.

Trochus
(Tectus niloticus, 
formerly Trochus 
niloticus)

© Emmanuel Tardy   © Kalo Pakoa

Species description Shell thick and heavy, and conical in shape. Aperture squarish, curved and 
and geographical smooth. Outer layer of shell is off-white with oblique purple-reddish stripes; 
distribution interior layer is thick and pearly white. Harvested for its nacreous shell and used 

for mother-of-pearl buttons.
Distribution: eastern Indian Ocean to Wallis Island, introduced farther east to 
French Polynesia.

Feeding Grazes on encrusting fleshy and coralline algae.
Habitat High aggregations found on reef fronts on atolls and high island fringing reefs; 
and aggregation on reef moderate aggregations on lagoon patch reefs, reef flats and fringing reef edges; 

and low aggregations found on back-reefs of fringing and barrier reefs.

Depth range From surface down to 30 m but generally less than 8 m.
Reproduction Separate sexes, begin reproducing when 50–70 mm in size and around 2 years in 

age. Spawn in warmer months. Juveniles settle after 5 days; less than one in every 
hundred survive to adult stage.

Maximum size Up to 160 mm (basal diameter).
Recommended harvest Size differs slightly by geographical location; large sizes > 110 mm are highly 
size range fecund but with poorer quality shells due to boring worm infection. Sexually 

mature shells should be allowed to breed at least once before being harvested; 
recommended harvest size range is 80–110 mm. 

Healthy density 500–600 ind. ha-1 on RBt and SWSt combined (site-specific density reference point 
reference point is recommended). 
Recommended survey Manta tow and RFs can be done for broad-scale coverage where conditions 
methods permit but generally, the recommended methods are RBt and SWSt (fine-scale 

assessment).

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 75



Appendix 4

Green snail 
(Turbo marmoratus)

© Kalo Pakoa   © Matthieu Juncker

Species description Green snail or turban snail is one of the largest tropical marine snails, growing 
and geographical up to 3 kg. Outer layer of shell greenish, inner layer pearly with large white 
distribution operculum. Harvested for its meat and nacreous shell for mother-of-pearl 

buttons, jewellery and inlays.
Distribution: Indian Ocean, Southeast Asia to Vanuatu; introduced farther east to 
Tonga and French Polynesia. 

Feeding Grazes on algae.
Habitat Prefers surf zone of barrier reefs. Moderate densities on reef flats and outer 
and aggregation on reef shoal of barrier reefs, and edges of fringing reefs and reef slopes. Juveniles 

typically hide in crevices.

Depth range From surface down to 15 m.
Reproduction Separate sexes; begins reproducing at 130–150 mm after 4 years; fecundity 

increases with size and age. Spawns throughout year in tropics and in warmer 
months in cooler areas; external fertilisation; larvae settle after 3–5 days. Less 
than one in every thousand survives to adult stage.

Maximum size Up to 230 mm (longest width) and 3 kg live weight.
Recommended Minimum recommended harvest size is 150 mm (longest width), maximum 
harvest size range harvest size has not been used.
Healthy density Unknown, limited data available. This species is in decline across Melanesia 
reference point where natural stocks exist; locally depleted in some places and remaining stocks 

status elsewhere are unknown. 
Recommended survey Manta tow and RFs along reef slope to assess distribution of adult aggregations 
methods (broad-scale assessment), and SWSt and RBt for very shallow stocks (fine-scale 

assessment).

76 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 4

Turban snail
(Turbo setosus)

© HR Siegel   © Kalo Pakoa

Species description Shell heavy and thick, globular shaped. Large spire closest to opening, other 
and geographical spires are relatively short. Surface with strong unequal spiral cords. Space 
distribution between spires almost always closed, opening large and oval. Cream with dark 

brown to black-green blotches. Thick calcareous operculum, white sometimes 
with green-brown thin border.
Distribution: found throughout the Pacific.

Feeding Grazes on algae.
Habitat Ocean side of barrier reefs, from reef crest to shallow outer slope in wave-
and aggregation on reef exposed reefs. Occasionally on back-reefs of barrier and lagoon patch reefs 

under a strong oceanic influence. 

Depth range Within 4 m, with highest densities in upper 1 m. 
Reproduction Separate sexes; fecundity increases with size and age. 
Maximum size 90 mm (longest width).
Recommended Not available.
harvest size range
Healthy density Not available.
reference point 
Recommended survey RFw (broad-scale assessment) and RBt (fine-scale assessment). 
methods

Note: Other turban snails (Turbo agyrostomus, T. crassus, T. chrysostomus) can also be found on reef tops.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 77



Appendix 4

Specimen and handicraft shells
A wide range of gastropods is used for the production of jewellery and ornamental specimens. Gastropods 
used in handicrafts are often those that are easily accessable and can be found in the intertidal and shoreline 
rocky habitat where sea spray and waves keep rock surfaces moist. Mangroves, seagrass and sandy habitats 
also contain other mollusc species used in handicrafts.

Specimen and Cypraea tigris Cypraea caputserpentis

handicraft shells

 © Pierre Peries  © David Beales

Species description A multi-species group of small gastropod species.
and geographical Distribution: found throughout the Pacific.
distribution
Feeding Varies among species. 
Habitat  Varies among species; some species found in intertidal and rocky shorelines 
and aggregation on reef where sea spray and waves keep rock surfaces moist. Mangroves, seagrass beds 

and sandy habitats also contain other mollusc species used in handicrafts.
Depth range Mostly intertidal but some species are subtidal.
Reproduction Varies among species, generally not well understood.
Maximum size Varies among species, generally less than 10 mm length.
Recommended Not available.
harvest size range
Healthy density Not available.
reference point 
Recommended survey Belt transect methods (e.g. RBt) are suitable for assessing rocky shore dwellers. 
methods Data can be analysed in a similar manner to transect techniques outlined in this 

manual.
Depending on the dominance of molluscs used in a particular location, surveys 
can be designed using a hierarchical survey design by establishing stations within 
sites and using belt transects and/or quadrats as replicates.
Depending on the natural densities of the molluscs, the number and size of 
replicates can be chosen, which will yield representative numbers of the target 
species.

78 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 4

Echinoderms
Sea cucumbers 
Sea cucumber species of commercial importance vary across the Pacific from five species in less complex reef 
systems to 26 species in more complex reef systems. Their habitat varies from sheltered inner reefs to deep 
lagoons and slopes, shallow intertidal areas to depths of over 50 meters. Prices vary by species and species 
groups and by processing quality. Information is presented on three species as indicators of value groups 
(Holothuria atra, H. whitmaei, Bohadschia argus), as habitat-restricted species (H. scabra for seagrass, Actinopyga 
mauritiana for reef crest and H. fuscogilva for deepwater species) and a nocturnal species (A. miliaris).

Lollyfish 
and reef lollyfish 
(Holothuria atra)

© Emmanuel Tardy  © Kalo Pakoa

Species description Black, soft body, often covered in sand with bare spots on the upper part. Three 
and geographical morphs of the species are found throughout the region: small lollyfish (found 
distribution on oceanic rocky islands), common lollyfish and reef lollyfish. Common lollyfish 

have soft, thin smooth body that stiffens when disturbed. Body surface of reef 
lollyfish can be rough in exposed habitats near reef crests. Gives off red-purple 
dye when rubbed.
Distribution: found throughout the Pacific Islands, it is the most common sea 
cucumber species. 

Feeding Feeds on sand and detritus to digest microorganisms and excretes sand, a 
process that helps to recycle nutrients in the lagoon.

Habitat High aggregations across most reef zones, moderate aggregations in some deep 
and aggregation on reef lagoons and low aggregations inside mangroves and outer reef slope.

Depth range From surface down to 30 m, with highest densities in first 5 m.
Reproduction Information is limited; adopts both sexual and asexual modes of reproduction. 
Maximum size 650 mm, all morphs considered, average live length varies across the region, 

common size in the Pacific around 230 mm.
Recommended Three morphs pose problems, common size 230 mm throughout Pacific, size 
harvest size range limit 300 mm live and 150 mm dry in Papua New Guinea, 165 mm live and 80 mm 

dry in Tonga. 
Healthy density 2,400 ind. ha-1 for manta tow surveys, 5,600 ind. ha-1 for RBt and SBt. 
reference point 
Recommended survey Manta tow (broad-scale assessment); RBt and SBt combined (fine-scale 
methods assessment).

Note: See Purcell et al. 2012 (Section 5) for details).

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 79



Appendix 4

Tigerfish or 
Leopardfish 
(Bohadschia argus)

© Steve Purcell   © Kalo Pakoa

Species description Ranges from light grey to brown, with characteristic eye-like spots with dark 
and geographical centre. Cylindrical but slightly flattened body that is wider than higher. Ejects sticky 
distribution white threads when disturbed. Medium-value species in the beche-de-mer trade.

Distribution: occurs from India in the Indian Ocean throughout south-east Asia to 
French Polynesia in the Pacific.

Feeding Feeds on detritus associated with sand.
Habitat Found in shallow lagoons and outer reef slopes and on back-reefs of fringing 
and aggregation on reef reefs, lagoon patch reefs and back-reefs of barrier reefs.

Depth range From 1–43 m, but highest densities in upper 5 m.
Reproduction Limited information available. Spawning occurs in December in New Caledonia 

and in June on the Great Barrier Reef in Australia.
Maximum size 600 mm, common size 370 mm in Pacific. 
Recommended Varies by geographical location: 350 mm on the Great Barrier Reef, 200 mm in 
harvest size range Papua New Guinea for live/fresh sea cucumber.
Healthy density 50 ind. ha-1 for manta tow surveys and 120 ind. ha-1 for RBt.
reference point 
Recommended survey Manta tow survey (broad-scale assessment) and RBt (fine-scale assessment). 
methods

Note: See Purcell et al. 2012 (Section 5) for details).

80 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 4

Black teatfish 
(Holothuria whitmaei)

© Steve Purcell   © Kalo Pakoa

Species description Always black, upper body coated with sand; dark grey lower body, juvenile can 
and geographical have white spots on the back. Solid thick body with thick protrusions on the 
distribution sides (‘teats’), rough body texture; small projections over body surface. Anus 

with small teeth visible at end of body. High-value species in beche-de-mer trade.
Distribution: occurs across Asia-Pacific to French Polynesia. 

Feeding Feeds on detritus.
Habitat Found mostly on shallow reef flats, often where some sand exists, but can be 
and aggregation on reef found in most zones of the reef system, including lower depths on the outer 

slope.

Depth range From surface up to 34 m, highest densities in upper 12 m depth with maximum 
densities in the upper 4 m in high water flow habitat. 

Reproduction Limited information available. Spawning is thought to occur during the cooler 
months, with spawning occurring between April and June on the Great Barrier 
Reef and in New Caledonia.

Maximum size 540 mm with common length at 340 mm.
Recommended Varies by geographical locations, harvest size limit 300 mm in New Caledonia and 
harvest size range Great Barrier Reef, 250–260 mm in Australia (Torres Strait). 
Healthy density 10 ind. ha-1 for manta tow survey, 50 ind. ha-1 for RBt (site-specific reference 
reference point points recommended).
Recommended survey Manta tow (broad-scale assessment) and RBt (fine-scale assessment).
methods

Note: See Purcell et al. 2012 (Section 5) for details).

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 81



Appendix 4

Sandfish 
(Holothuria scabra)

© Emmanuel Tardy  © Kalo Pakoa

Species description Grey, dark grey with tiny black dots; lighter-coloured upper body surface. 
and geographical Somewhat cylindrical body with deep wrinkles on upper surface. Very short 
distribution protrusions on body. High-value species in the beche-de-mer trade.

Distribution: occurs from the Indian Ocean across Southeast Asia to as far as 
Wallis Island. 

Feeding Feeds on detritus in the sediment.
Habitat Shallow bays, prefers soft sediment (muddy sand) with less dense seagrass 
and aggregation on reef growth, associated with mangroves where it buries itself. Sometimes low 

densities can be found in inner lagoons and in mangroves.

Depth range Upper 3 m but highest densities are in the upper 1 m. 
Reproduction Attains sexual maturity at 160 mm in New Caledonia, 250 mm in northern 

Australia.
Maximum size 400 mm undisturbed length but individuals of this size are rare. Large adult size 

common at 230 mm in Pacific.
Recommended Varies by location, 200 mm size limit in New Caledonia, 180 mm in Australia 
harvest size range (Torres Strait) and 220 mm in Papua New Guinea.
Healthy density Pacific regional reference point at 700 ind. ha-1 during SBt surveys (site-specific 
reference point reference density recommended).
Recommended survey SBt and SWSs to assess stocks in deep lagoons (fine-scale assessment). 
methods

82 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 4

Hairy blackfish 
(Actinopyga miliaris)

© SPC   © Kalo Pakoa

Species description Black to dark brown with hairy protrusions and a slightly lighter lower surface. 
and geographical Solid, thick cylindrical body. Five conical anal teeth; contracts to a ball when 
distribution handled or removed from the water. Active at night and often difficult to see 

during the day. Medium- to high-value species in the beche-de-mer trade.
Distribution: occurs across South East Asia to Tonga in the Pacific.

Feeding Feeds on detritus in the sediment.
Habitat Seagrass beds and sandy areas, reef flats of fringing and lagoon patch reefs. 
and aggregation on reef Absent on barrier reefs. Prefers sheltered shallow lagoons with seagrass mixed 

with coralline algae, mangrove-influenced rubble reef flats. Hides inside rock 
crevices during the day.

Depth range Found in upper 10 m, but highest densities are in upper 4 m. 
Reproduction Limited information. Spawns in May and November in New Caledonia.
Maximum size 350 mm, common at 200 mm in Pacific. Length can be difficult to measure 

accurately because it shrinks quickly when disturbed.
Recommended Difficult to propose a size limit because of high plasticity (this species contracts 
harvest size range or expands when handled), varying size limits are used in the region (e.g. 

250 mm in New Caledonia, 200 mm in Papua New Guinea). Weight limit may be 
more appropriate due to high plasticity in size.

Healthy density Regional reference points of 150 ind. ha-1 for daytime SBt assessments in target 
reference point habitat, 200 ind. ha-1 for SCNs in target habitat (site-specific reference points 

recommended).
Recommended survey SBt is the recommended for daytime surveys; SCNs are also useful (fine-scale 
methods assessment).

Note: See Purcell et al. 2012 (Section 5) for details).

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 83



Appendix 4

Surf redfish 
(Actinopyga mauritiana)

© Emmanuel Tardy   © Kalo Pakoa

Species description Rusty brown with whitish blotches and spots. Rigid body with flat lower surface 
and geographical covered in numerous tube feet that stick to hard surfaces. Five anal teeth at 
distribution posterior end.

Distribution: Indian Ocean to Asia-Pacific region.
Feeding Feeds on detritus on hard reef surfaces.
Habitat Prefers surf zone along reef crest, down to a few meters on outer slope. 
and aggregation on reef Occasionally found on back-reefs, lagoon patch reefs and edge of fringing reefs 

under strong oceanic influence. 

Depth range Size at maturity reported at 230 mm, and 125–350 g. See Purcell et al. 2012 for 
details.

Reproduction From surface down to 10 m with highest densities in upper 1 m. Concentrated on 
reef crests, occasionally exposed at low tide in atoll reef systems. 

Maximum size 380 mm, with 240 mm being common. 
Recommended Minimum live size limit is 200 mm in Papua New Guinea, 250 mm in New 
harvest size range Caledonia and Great Barrier Reef. Notable size difference by reef system, 

relatively smaller sizes in atoll populations and larger sizes in high island 
populations.

Healthy density 200 ind. ha-1 for RFs or RBt along reef crest.
reference point 
Recommended survey Manta tow on outside reef on high islands where conditions are suitable (broad-
methods scale assessment); RBt on reef crest at low tide (fine-scale assessment).

Note: See Purcell et al. 2012 (Section 5) for details).

84 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 4

White teatfish 
(Holothuria fuscogilva)

© SPC  © Kalo Pakoa

Species description Variable colour from dark brown or creamy white, with or without blotches on 
and geographical upper body; light brown lower body surface. Upper surface coated with sand. 
distribution Solid, rigid body with pointed side protrusions (‘teats’). Anus visible at posterior 

end with small anal teeth. High-value species in the beche-de-mer trade.
Distribution: Indian Ocean across the Asia-Pacific region to French Polynesia. 

Feeding Feeds on detritus.
Habitat and aggregation Mostly found on deep sandy and hard substrate. Common in lagoon passages at 
on the reef the base of reef slopes where currents of oceanic water are moderate to strong.

Depth range Generally from 3–50+ m, but high densities found in the upper 15 m. 
Reproduction Size at maturity at 1,100 g. Spawn between November and January in New 

Caledonia, August to October in Solomon Islands.
Maximum size 570 mm.
Recommended harvest 380 mm is recommended but lower harvest limits of 350 mm are in force for 
size range Papua New Guinea and New Caledonia. 
Healthy density 20 ind. ha-1 for RBt and SBt combined; 20 ind. ha-1 for DWSs (site-specific 
reference point reference densities are recommended).
Recommended survey RBt (fine-scale assessment); manta tow in clear water and DWSs (broad-scale 
methods assessment). 

Note: See Purcell et al. 2008, 2012 (Section 5) for details).

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 85



Appendix 4

Other echinoderms

Striped sea urchin 
(Tripneustes gratilla)

© Kalo Pakoa  
Species description More or less hemispherical shape, flat underneath. Spines are short and tube 
and geographical feet are long and numerous. Outer shell is often purple, brown to violet; spines 
distribution can be whitish, light brown to orange, grey-red and sometime almost black. Tube 

feet are black and white. Well hidden, covered with small pieces of algae, stone 
or corals.
Distribution: occurs throughout the tropical and subtropical Indo-Pacific region.

Feeding Grazes on algae, periphyton and seagrass.
Habitat Common in most habitats but prefers sandy shallow calm waters, including 
and aggregation on reef seagrass beds. Can be common at depth on outer slopes of oceanic fringing 

reefs.

Depth range From surface down to 32 m with highest densities within 3 m of surface.
Reproduction Generally not well known.
Maximum size 140 mm (length without spines).
Recommended Not available.
harvest size range
Healthy density Not available.
reference point 
Recommended survey Manta tow surveys (broad-scale assessment); RBt and SBt for a detailed record 
methods of sizes (fine-scale assessment).

86 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 4

Crown-of-thorns 
starfish (COTS) 
(Acanthaster planci)

© Emmanuel Tardy   © Kalo Pakoa

Species description Body with large central area and up to 18 short arms with triangular shape. 
and geographical Numerous long spines on upper body that can cause painful stings. Usually 
distribution green to reddish with orange to red spines.

Distribution: occurs from the Red Sea and east coast of Africa throughout the 
tropical and subtropical Indo-Pacific region to the west coast of Central America.

Feeding Feed on live hard corals wherever they occur. Commonly seen in Acropora 
thickets or plate coral where they remain hidden during the day. COTS play a 
part in the natural ecological equilibrium of the reef and are usually present in 
low densities on healthy reefs. Under certain circumstances, populations greatly 
increase in density and these outbreaks can be devastating for the living corals 
on which they feed. COTS can eat an area of coral approximately equal to their 
own size per day. 

Habitat and aggregation Found where live corals are present on fringing reefs, lagoon patch reefs, back-
on reef reefs, reef fronts and outer reef slopes.

Depth range From surface down to 35 m, but upper 15 m is where majority of coral damage 
occurs.

Reproduction Mature at around 2–3 years old and breeds for 5–7 years. Spawns from 
December to April on the Great Barrier Reef. Each female can produce up to 
60 million eggs during a single spawning season.

Maximum size Over 1,000 mm in diameter.
Maximum density Incipient outbreak = density at which significant coral damage is likely, 
before outbreak 8.25 ind. ha-1 (Manta).

Active outbreak = significant reduction in coral cover, > 37.5 ind. ha-1 (Manta). 
Defining the size of COTS in outbreaks helps to define the current state of 
the outbreak. The size of COTS is not recorded by individual diameter, but 
in sub-classes of maturity: juveniles = < 150 mm diameter (< 2 years old); sub 
adults = 150–250 mm diameter (2 years old); adults = > 260 mm diameter 
(< 3 years old).

Recommended survey Manta tow is suitable for assessing the scale of outbreak and area of estimated 
methods damage (broad-scale assessment).

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 87



Appendix 4

How to reduce Eradication programmes are very expensive if there are large numbers of COTS 
population in outbreak and, therefore, it is only possible to protect small key areas (approximately 

5–10 ha) through COTS removal. Physical removal is the easiest and cheapest 
method for shallow water outbreaks, with COTS buried ashore. Has been done 
successfully in Indonesia and Mauritius. Cutting up COTS under water does not 
kill them and may risk their numbers increasing (starfish can regenerate from 
single arms). Killing individuals by injecting poison using a large mechanical 
syringe (type used on cattle or sheep) has also been used, but scuba diving skills 
are required. Sodium bisulphate is considered to be the most effective because it 
is relatively inexpensive and is thought to be harmless to other organisms when 
properly handled. Dedicated surveys might be necessary, but regular recording 
of COTs during resource surveys (e.g. manta and timed swims) may be sufficient 
for monitoring purposes.

88 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 4

Bivalves 
Giant clams 
Eight species of giant clams are present in the Pacific, six of which are common in subsistence and commercial 
fisheries.

Elongate giant clam 
(Tridacna maxima)

© Eugen Zeissi  © Kalo Pakoa

Species description Variable in shape; valves are strongly unequal and usually elongate-oval in 
and geographical outline. There are 6 or 7 broad, rib-like radial folds on the outer shell surface. 
distribution Scales are present on the valves of the shell, but are smaller and closer together 

than in T. squamosa; scales eroded on embedded specimens. T. maxima exhibit a 
wide range of colours.
Distribution: found throughout the Pacific. 

Feeding Feeds by filter feeding and from zooxanthellae activity.
Habitat Across reef habitats but more common on reefs influenced by oceanic water 
and aggregation on reef along barrier reefs of atolls and fringing reef edges. High aggregations 

sometimes observed on lagoon patch reefs and back-reefs of barrier reefs.

Depth range From surface down to 35 m, with highest densities in upper 2 m.
Reproduction Hemathrodites, spawn eggs and sperm. Size at sexual maturity varies across the 

region. Starts spawning at 130–150 mm in Palau, and 55 mm in Tonga.
Maximum size 380 mm (longest length); maximum size decreases from western to eastern 

Pacific.
Recommended Varies by geographical location; minimum size limit in American Samoa, Guam 
harvest size range and Niue is 180 mm, 160 mm in Samoa, 155 mm in Tonga, and 120 mm in French 

Polynesia.
Healthy density Regional reference for RBt surveys at 750 ind. ha-1 (site-specific density reference 
reference point points are recommended).
Recommended survey Manta tow (broad-scale assessment); RBt for accurate length data and also 
methods SWSt (fine-scale assessment). 

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 89



Appendix 4

Boring giant clam or 
crosus clam
(Tridacna crocea)

© BMR   © Kalo Pakoa

Species description Smallest of all giant clams. Found deeply embedded in dead reefs or coral heads. 
and geographical Shell rounder than T. maxima, with 4 or 5 broad moderately flattened, rib-like 
distribution folds. Outer surface of shell has small folds or striations, but is usually smooth; 

white interior often with yellow, orange to pink hues on margins. Small size can 
be confused with the elongate giant clam, when both species are deeply fixed on 
coral heads.
Distribution: Southeast Asia and western Pacific to Vanuatu.

Feeding Feeds by filter feeding and from zooxanthellae activity.
Habitat Found in calm water on fringing reefs and lagoon patch reefs under strong 
and aggregation on reef terrestrial influence. Lives on hard reef bottoms, mostly deeply embedded in 

Porites coral heads of carbonated rock. T. crocea burrows inside limestone rock 
by excreting chemical that dissolve lime, and by opening and closing, which helps 
sink into rock. Smooth outer surface of shell usually results from rubbing against 
the rock it is imbedded in. 

Depth range From surface down to 9 m, mostly down to 3 m.
Reproduction Hermaphrodites, spawn eggs and sperm. Spawns in warmer months.
Maximum size 195 mm (longest length).
Recommended Harvested for food and for live aquarium trade in the past, now trade in wild 
harvest size range harvest is uncommon. 100 mm in length is recommended for harvest.
Healthy density In areas where clams are common, 5,000 ind. ha-1 (RBt stations) is sustainable 
reference point density equivalent to one clam every 2 m2.
Recommended survey Manta tow surveys (broad-scale assessment) and RBt (fine-scale assessment).
methods

90 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 4

Fluted giant clam T. squamosa T. derasa T. gigas

(Tridacna squamosa) 
Smooth giant clam  
(T. derasa)  
True giant clam  
(T. gigas)

© Kalo Pakoa © Matthieu Juncker © Antoine Tetelbaum

Species description Tridacna squamosa: shell moderately large, both valves almost equal with widely 
and geographical spaced fluted scales that become larger towards the edge of the valves.
distribution Distribution: occurs from the Red Sea and east coast of Africa throughout the 

Indo-Pacific region to French Polynesia.
T. derasa: second largest species. Shell thick and heavy, valves unequal. Shell 
white and smooth, with 7–12 broad and low radial folds.
Distribution: occurs across South East Asia to Tonga in the Pacific.
T. gigas: largest species of giant clam. Shell thick and heavy, both valves almost 
equal. Shell white and smooth with 4–6 deep radial folds.
Distribution: occurs across South East Asia to Fiji in the Pacific. May be locally 
extinct in several PICTs.

Feeding Feed by filter feeding and from zooxanthellae activity.
Habitat T. squamosa: relatively common species found from fringing reefs to barrier 
and aggregation on reef reefs. More common in deeper water than T. maxima.

T. derasa: mostly on outer reefs where there is high water flow and strong 
oceanic influence, rarely on fringing reefs.

T. gigas: on sand, in coral reef areas. This species can be found in most reef 
zones, from frining reefs to outer reefs. Not common on reefs that are 
particularly exposed to land influence or wave action.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 91



Appendix 4

Depth range T. squamosa: from surface down to 35 m.
T. derasa: from 2–25 m.
T. gigas: from 2–20 m.

Reproduction Hermaphrodites, spawns eggs and sperm.
Sizes at sexual maturity:
T. squamosa: 150–200 mm in Palau, 200–250 mm in Tonga.
T. derasa: 250–300 mm.
T. gigas: 500 mm.

Maximum size T. squamosa: 435 mm (longest length).
T. derasa: 650 mm (longest length).
T. gigas: 1,150 mm (longest length).

Recommended harvest T. squamosa: 180 mm in Guam and Tonga, 200 mm in Samoa.
size range T. derasa: 180 mm in Guam, 260 mm in Tonga.

T. gigas: no size regulation in place.
Note: in most places T. gigas is too rare to harvest and takes 10+ years to reach 
female reproductive maturity.

Healthy density T. squamosa: regional reference at 20–30 ind. ha-1 for RBt and SBt surveys (site-
reference point specific references recommended).

Insufficient data on T. derasa and T. gigas for regional reference (site-specific 
references recommended).

Recommended survey Manta tow and SWSs (broad-scale assessment); SWSt (fine-scale assessment). 
methods

92 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 4

Bear paw giant clam
(Hippopus hippopus)

© Kalo Pakoa  © Kalo Pakoa

Species description Shell thick and heavy. Radial folds on shell irregular. Relatively squarish in shape 
and geographical with a very rough surface and the upper margin is triangular. Mantle is dull grey. 
distribution Shell is white with pinkish blotches. Sits loosely on reef habitat.

Distribution: occurs across South East Asia to Vanuatu in the Pacific. Thought to 
be locally extinct further to the east.

Feeding Feeds by filter feeding and from zooxanthellae activity.
Habitat Calm shallow waters in areas adjacent to coral reefs where there is a mix of 
and aggregation on reef live coral, coral rubble and sediment, often in association with seagrass. High 

densities in fringing reefs. Lower densities on lagoon patch reefs and back-reefs.

Depth range Shallow waters, from surface down to 10 m although highest densities occur in 
upper 2 m.

Reproduction Limited information available.
Attains sexual maturity at 130–150 mm in Palau.

Maximum size 430 mm (longest length).
Recommended Not available. Minimum harvest size set at 180 mm in Guam. 
harvest size range
Healthy density Pacific regional reference at 25–34 ind. ha-1 (site-specific references 
reference point recommended). 
Recommended survey Manta tow survey (broad-scale assessment); SBt and RBt (fine-scale 
methods assessment).

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 93



Appendix 4

Other bivalves

Cockle or ark shells Anadara antiquata Gafrarium pectinatum

(Anadara spp., also 
other infaunal species 
such as Gafrarium spp.)

© Pierre Peries  © Pierre Peries

Species description Shell thick and solid, equal valves and unequal shell edge, four-sided to ovate. 
and geographical Surface of shell has axial ribs. Long hinge, almost straight with many small 
distribution transversal teeth. Several species, important in subsistence fishery and domestic 

sales.
Distribution: found throughout the Pacific. 

Feeding Filter feeders.
Habitat Epibenthic species; lives in shallow, soft sediments on of seagrass beds and 
and aggregation on reef fringing reefs. 

Depth range From surface down to 5 m with highest densities in the intertidal zone. 
Reproduction Limited information available. Some species attain sexual maturity at 35 mm. 

Typically spawns during warmer months.
Maximum size Anadara antiquata: 105 mm (shell width).
Recommended Anadara antiquata: 45 mm.
harvest size range
Healthy density 2–5 shells per m².
reference point 
Recommended survey SiQ (fine-scale assessment).
methods

94 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 4

Crustaceans
Information and suggested survey approaches for five crustaceans, including two lobsters, one mud crab, one 
land crab and coconut crab, are provided below. In general, survey techniques used for invertebrate species 
described in Section 3 can be adapted for the following species of interest but with changes in the size of 
individual samples (replicates, transects, search times). 

Only generalised survey approaches and techniques are suggested here but the suggestions are based on 
the known life history traits of these species and are often adapted from local harvesting approaches. It is 
important to note that these suggested techniques have not been tested for their usefulness in obtaining 
realistic estimates of the status of populations, and are offered as a general guide only.

Spiny rock lobsters Panulirus ornatus Panulirus penicillatus

(Panulirus spp.)

© Eric Clua  © Joseph Poupin

Species description Large crustaceans with semi-cylindrical bodies with spines, horns over eyes, long 
and geographical antennae, but no large claws. Seven species of Panulirus exist in the tropical 
distribution Pacific. Each species has distinctive bright colouration patterns.

Distribution: P. penicillatus ranges across the Pacific to eastern Polynesia and is 
the main species harvested along with smaller quantities of P. longipes spinosus. 
P. versicolor is widespread but in low densities, while P. ornatus is important in 
Papua New Guinea. Other species are relatively uncommon across the Pacific.

Feeding Forage at night, predominantly on mollusks and algae. 
Habitat Species respond differently to habitat gradients such as depth, turbidity, coral 
and aggregation on reef cover and wave action. Some species have generalised habitat requirements (e.g. 

P. ornatus) while others have more specific requirements (e.g. P. penicillatus).
P. penicillatus is found on surf zone habitats of outer reefs, and moves onto reef 
flats to feed, but tends to prefer windward margins.
P. longipes is generally found on shallow outer reefs and areas with moderate 
wave action and more coral than P. penicillatus habitats, especially in large and 
deep holes.
P. versicolor is found in outer lagoon edges and lagoon patch reefs and in deeper 
habitats on outer reef slopes where more fragile coral forms are located.
P. ornatus is found in island coastal habitats adjacent to the shore, including 
shallow lagoons and fringing reefs.
P. femoristriga is found on outer reef flats and shallow outer slopes.
P. homarus is found on fringing reefs where there is low terrestrial runoff.
P. polyphagus is found on fringing reefs where there can be heavy terrestrial 
runoff.

Depth range Surface to deep outer slopes, depending on species.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 95



Appendix 4

Reproduction P. penicillatus is perhaps the most abundant lobster species found in the Pacific 
and more is known about its ecology than other species. Reproduction is 
continuous throughout the year in the Cook Islands. The relatively larger females 
carry fertilised eggs for about a month before releasing them, with an individual 
female having 8–11 broods per year. Males tend to have a relatively longer 
carapace length but are smaller in terms of body weight, total body length and 
tail width compared with females. The number of eggs per brood in females 
70–130 mm in size ranges from 100,000–500,000. Females at sexual maturity are 
75–79 mm carapace length (at about 3–5 years old) and live for about 20 years. 
In Tonga, P. penicillatus females were recorded to reach sexual maturity at about 
60–70 mm carapace length.
In contrast to the Cook Islands studies, P. penicillatus in Tonga showed seasonal 
spawning activity from September to March with peak spawning from October–
December. P. longipes spinosus may spawn throughout the year in Tonga but 
there appears to be low spawning activity from May–July.

Recommended harvest Size limit for P. penicillatus in French Polynesia is 180 mm. 
size range
Healthy density Limited information available. Densities of P. pencillatus have been recorded at 
reference point 120–130 ind. km-2 of reef edge in the Solomon Islands and Marshall Islands. On 

Palmerston Atoll in the Cook Islands, an average of 2.2 crayfish were caught per 
person per hour by walking along the reef crest, and 4 crayfish per hour for free 
diving along the reef front down to 4 m. This equates to approximately 20 kg of 
lobster per kilometer of reef crest.

Recommended survey Surveys at night and at low tide by walking on the reef crest, as well as by free 
methods diving with torches.

A standard survey area could be easily calculated if searches were restricted to 
a defined width and length (e.g. a 5 m swath), and distances could be accurately 
determined by using a GPS. Standardised distances of 500 m or 1,000 m (1 km) 
are recommended; this way, a density per unit of area (in this example, density 
per 2,500 m2 or 5,000 m2) could be recorded.

96 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 4

Slipper lobsters Parribacus caledonicus Parribacus antarcticus

(Scyllaridae)

© Matthieu Juncker  © Chan Tin-Yam

Species description Related to spiny lobsters but have flattened bodies with no horns and very short, 
and geographical flattened antennae. Second antennae are expanded and flattened into large 
distribution plates that extend horizontally forward from the animal’s head. There are five 

other species (besides Parribacus caledonicus) in this group, including 
P. antarcticus, Scyllarides squamosa, Scyllarus cultrifa and Thenus orientalis.
Distribution: P. caledonicus is widely distributed in the western Pacific;  
P. antarcticus is found in all oceans, including the Pacific; Scyllarides squamosa 
and Scyllarus cultrifa have been recorded in Tonga on or near rocky coral reefs; 
Thenus orientalis is distributed in the Indian and Pacific oceans.

Feeding Hunt at night on gastropods, mollusks, polychaetes and other invertebrates.
Habitat and aggregation Slipper lobsters are bottom dwellers and live in the shallow waters of lagoons 
on the reef and in crevices on reefs. Some (e.g. P. caledonicus) live in cavities or nests with 

small openings. Burrow in sand or hide on reefs during the day.
Depth range P. caledonicus occurs in shallow inshore waters down to 20 m near coral and 

rocky reefs. S. squamosa occurs subtidally down to 80 m in Tonga.
Reproduction Reaches sexual maturity at about 3 years of age. P. caledonicus spawn from 

September to January with peak activity in November, and little evidence of 
spawning activity the rest of the year. Females release up to 100,000 eggs which 
are carried beneath the body for 2 weeks or more as eggs develop and change 
colour from orange to brown. Eggs hatch into floating larvae and drift at sea for 
up to 11 months, with very few surviving to the juvenile stage. Life expectancy 
is approximately 10 years once a lobster has settled and metamorphosed into a 
juvenile.

Maximum size P. caledonicus – up to 180 mm total length; P. antarcticus – up to 280 mm total 
length and a weight of over 0.5 kg.

Recommended harvest Not available.
size range
Healthy density Not available.
reference point
Recommended survey RFw adapted for long-distance replicates for P. penicillatus, on a scale of 
methods 500–1,000 m per replicate of reef front may be required. The range of species 

habitat preferences and generally low abundances suggest that accurate stock 
assessments will be difficult to conduct. 
An overlap of habitat preference of P. caledonicus with some spiny lobster 
species suggests that there may be scope for density estimates for both groups 
using similar survey methods.
Use of mark-release-capture studies also could be a useful technique for status 
estimates.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 97



Appendix 4

Coconut crab
(Birgus latro)

Male

Female
© Matthieu Juncker © Kalo Pakoa

Species description Related to hermit crabs and is the largest of all crabs. Adults have large crushing 
and geographical claws and long legs that enable them to climb trees. Colour of adults varies from 
distribution light violet to deep purple and brown. Slow-growing species that can live up to 

30 years. It is estimated that it takes up to 10 years for individual to reach market 
size.
Distribution: from far western Pacific to as far east as French Polynesia. 

Feeding Feeds on coconuts, dead leaves and bush vines and fruits; some high island crabs 
can be toxic if eaten, especially if it feeds on certain bush plants. 

Habitat Larval stages spend about a month in the ocean developing through several 
and aggregation on reef larval stages before returning to land as young. Juveniles live in gastropod 

shells like other hermit crabs until they grow to a larger size where the adult 
lives independently of a shell. After developing into adults, they spend their life 
in coastal vegetation (sometimes far inland, up to 6 km from the sea) and only 
females return to the sea edge to release eggs during breeding season. Adults 
live alone in underground burrows and rock crevices and generally remain 
hidden during the day, coming out at night to look for food.

Depth range Not applicable. Lives on land.
Reproduction Sexual maturity reached at ~ 5 years of age (at an approximate thoracic length of 

25 cm for females). Outer skeleton is shed in order to grow; crabs remain hidden 
(for protection) for up to 30 days as they develop a new hard outer skeleton.

Maximum size Adults can reach weights of over 4 kg. 
Recommended harvest Size limits vary by country: cephalothoracic length – 75 mm in American Samoa, 
size range 90 mm in Vanuatu; thoracic length – 36 mm in Wallis and Futuna and Niue.
Healthy density Not available.
reference point

98 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 4

Recommended survey Different techniques are required for juvenile and the adults.
methods Baited trails: Opened coconut shells used as lures (similar to how subsistence 

fishers hunt for them) and set out on a grid system through the forest area, and 
then surveyed regularly. A number of baits are set out along a trail during the 
day and revisited at night, collecting the crabs that are attracted to the baits. 
Density can only be estimated from catch per unit of effort (number of crabs per 
coconut bait).
Direct capture and capture in moulting burrows: Transects of a set distance 
and width (e.g. 5 m x 50 m; 6 transects per station; chosen number of stations 
per site) are laid out. These can be analysed in the same manner as marine 
benthic transect data. This method requires some skill in handling crabs and 
measuring their carapace length.
A direct estimation of the number of coconut crabs in a given area is difficult. 
Mark and recapture estimates have been made on a number of small islands, 
but on large islands recapture rates are too low for reasonable estimates to 
be made. To overcome this problem, Fletcher et al. (1994) (see Section 5) 
determined the relationship between the relative abundance measure (number 
of crabs caught per bait set) and the absolute stock size through the calculation 
of the catchability coefficient (q). This was determined from experiments in 
Vanuatu where a catch per unit of effort (CPUE) of 1 crab per bait corresponded 
to a population density of 1,200 ha-1. This coefficient only relates to CPUE data 
collected during the wet season, using baits set at locations where crabs are 
likely to be found. The area measurement obviously should only encompass 
areas of suitable habitat for coconut crabs. The catchability coefficient has been 
used to estimate remaining crab stocks in various parts of Vanuatu, and it is likely 
that it could be applied equally, but with caution, to crab stocks in any area.
Fisheries-dependant data, in particular CPUE and landings at markets, are useful 
information for assessing population structure occurrences of illegally caught 
sizes and production trends.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 99



Appendix 4

Mangrove crab
(Scylla serrata)

© Matthieu Juncker  © Richard Ling

Species description Crustaceans with claws and hard outer body skeletons. Shell varies from deep 
and geographical mottled green to very dark brown or purple. S. serrata is a swimming crab. Other 
distribution related genuses may exist in same habitat.

Distribution: found in tropical and subtropical inshore areas from Africa to 
Pacific Islands in association with mangroves and estuarine systems; widespread 
distribution throughout the Pacific.

Feeding Feeds on small clams, shrimps, barnacles, small fish and plant material and other 
crabs. Small juveniles are prey for wading birds and fish; adults are preyed on by 
larger fish and sharks. 

Habitat and aggregation Widely distributed in all habitats on coral reefs associated with mangrove 
on the reef and seagrass habitats. S. serrata is generally a nocturnal species. S. serrata 

is estimated to have a life span of approximately 5 years, becoming sexually 
mature at 2–3 years of age.

Depth range Generally shallow areas; lives in mud and brackish water associated with 
mangrove and estuarine environments. 

Reproduction Separate males and females. Females carry fertilised eggs for around 12 days, 
move to sea to release eggs, juvenile crabs settle to bottom after approximately 
3 weeks.

Maximum size Around 3.5 kg and 240 mm (carapace width).
Recommended harvest Minimum harvest sizes can be set from 120–150 mm carapace width.
size range
Healthy density Not available.
reference point
Recommended survey Mangrove mud crabs are particularly difficult to survey but the most appropriate 
methods data will probably come from set traps. Mark-release-capture approaches can 

provide useful stock estimates. 
Fisheries-dependant data, in particular CPUE and landings at markets, are useful 
information for managers to assess population structure occurrences of illegally 
caught sizes and production trends.

100 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 4

Land crabs Cardisoma carnifex Cardisoma carnifex

(Cardisoma spp.)

© B. Navez   © Drew Avery

Species description Crustaceans principally adapted to life on land though the reproductive stage 
and geographical requires larvae to develop from eggs in the ocean.
distribution Distribution: widespread throughout the Pacific.
Feeding Land crabs are omnivorous and feed on a wide range of animal and plant 

material, including their own young. Their diet is usually limited to items found in 
close proximity to their burrows.

Habitat Typically occur in coastal vegetation areas. Land crabs are difficult to detect 
and aggregation on reef because they generally forage at night or are more active out of their burrows at 

dawn and dusk.
Depth range Not applicable. Lives on land.
Reproduction Land crab eggs need to be in salt water in order to hatch. Cardisoma hirtipes 

females migrate from their holes in the forest to beaches to release their eggs in 
the sea during the few days before or after the full moon. Land crabs are easily 
harvested during this migration, and are also harvested at other times of the 
month when they emerge from their burrows to feed in the early morning or 
late afternoon.

Maximum size Limited study on growth and lack of size limits in most fisheries.
Recommended harvest Not available.
size range
Healthy density Not available.
reference point
Recommended survey The land crab’s general nocturnal foraging behaviour means that night surveys 
methods are required. 

Land crabs also migrate to the beach for breeding (like coconut crabs) so this 
time of year can be used to estimate the status of breeding females, although 
the status of other components of the population (males, juveniles) will have to 
be assessed by night surveys.
Transects (similar to those used for coconut crabs) or large grid (quadrat) 
sampling methods can be established to determine density estimates per unit 
area. As a guide, grids could be up to 6 per station, and each grid 5–10 m2.
Fisheries-dependant data, in particular CPUE and landings at markets, are useful 
information for managers to assess population structure and production trends.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 101



Appendix 4

Cephalopods 

Octopuses Octopus cyanea Octopus cyanea

© Matthieu Juncker   © Brocken  Inaglory

Species description Octopuses are related to squids and have eight arms with suckers, soft saclike 
and geographical bodies, and strong, beaklike jaws.
distribution Distribution: at least 100 species of octopuses are distributed in seas around the 

world.
Feeding Feed on a range on invertebrates and fishes. Most octopuses feed at night but 

the big blue or day octopus, Octopus cyanea, feeds during the day, leaving their 
holes infrequently to forage. 

Habitta Octopuses can be found under ledges or in holes on reef flats and shallow 
and aggregation on reef outer slopes, and the location of these can often be recognised by rubble and 

remains of their food (e.g. empty shells) at the entrance to their hole. Holes are 
not continuously occupied by the same individual but have been observed up to 
35 days in the same location.

Depth range Fringing reefs to outer reef slope depths.
Reproduction Octopuses have separate sexes. Males insert packets of sperm (called 

spermatophores) into a female’s mantle cavity using a specialised tentacle 
(called a hectocotylus). Female releases hundreds of eggs that are fertilised 
by the stored sperm. Female lays fertilised eggs in bunches under a ledge or 
within a nest on the reef. Females protect eggs and do not hunt for a period of 
several weeks until eggs hatch. Newly hatched forms (drifting larval stages) look 
like small adults and swim for about a month. Only a few, perhaps one in every 
hundred, survive to settle onto the sea floor as juveniles.

Maximum size Octopuses vary greatly in size but O. cyanea are widely distributed on coral reefs 
in the Pacific and grow to an overall length of about 1 m.

Recommended harvest Varies among species.
size range
Healthy density Not available.
reference point
Recommended survey An experienced observer may be able to give some estimates of the number 
methods of holes where octopus are likely to be found, but an accurate estimate of 

octopuses is extremely difficult to make due to the cryptic behaviour and 
general mobility. Counting individuals when they are out of hiding and foraging 
can also provide an approximate estimate of abundance.
In the absence of resource data, fisher data are useful, CPUE and landings and 
catch sizes at local markets, are useful for managers to gain an approximate idea 
of the trend of octopus status.

102 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 5. Field survey 
datasheets

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 103



Appendix 5a. Invertebrate survey main record sheet (all surveys except SiQ and crab bait)
Appendix 5a. Invertebrate survey main record sheet  

 DATE  RECORDER  Pg No  
 
STATION NAME                      
WPT / WIDTH OF REPLICATE                   

                   

                   

                   

                   

                   

                   

                   

                   

                   

                   

                   

                   

                   

                   

                   

                   

                   

                   

                   

                   

                   

RELIEF  /  COMPLEXITY  1- 5                   
OCEAN  INFLUENCE  1- 5                   
DEPTH (M)                   
% SOFT SED     (M – S – CS)                   
% RUBBLE     /     BOULDERS                   
% CONSOL RUBBLE / PAVE                   
% CORAL   LIVE                   
% CORAL   DEAD                   
SOFT /  SPONGE  /  FUNGIDS                   
ALGAE        CCA                      
                    CORALLINE                    
                    OTHER                   
GRASS                   
    

 
 
EPIPHYTES  1-5  /  SILT  1-5                   
BLEACHING: % of benthos                    

ENTERED     /    CHECKED                   

 

104 A ssessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 5b. Manta tow summary sheet
Appendix 5b. Manta tow summary sheet  

 

     DATE       Pg   
 

WPT WPT TIME START:  
 DISTANCE SPEED 

START FINISH  
MAPS & NOTES 

1      
 

2               

3               

4               

5               

6      
TIME FINISH: 

               

WPT WPT TIME START:  
 DISTANCE SPEED 

START FINISH  
MAPS & NOTES 

 
1      

2               

3               

4               

5               

6      
TIME FINISH: 

               

WPT WPT TIME START:  
 DISTANCE SPEED 

START FINISH  
 MAPS & NOTES 

1      
 

2               

3               

4               

5               

6      
TIME FINISH: 

 

 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 105



ApAppepnednixd i5xc .5 Sco Sfto ifntf ainufnaauln qaula qduraadt rraetc orerdco srhde esht eet   
 

 

DATE        Pg   
 

1            

2            

3            

4            

5            

6            

7            

8            

RELIEF / COMPLEXITY 1-5  DEPTH M    RELIEF / COMPLEXITY 1-5  DEPTH M   
OCEAN  INFLUENCE  1-5     OCEAN  INFLUENCE  1-5    

% MUD     /    SAND     % MUD     /    SAND    
% C SAND  /  SHELL-PEBBLE     % C SAND  /  SHELL-PEBBLE    
% RUBBLE     /     BOULDERS     % RUBBLE     /     BOULDERS    
% CONS RUBBLE    /    PAVE     % CONS RUBBLE    /    PAVE    
% CORAL   LIVE   /   DEAD     % CORAL   LIVE   /   DEAD    

SOFT /  SPONGE  /  FUNGIDS     SOFT /  SPONGE  /  FUNGIDS    
      ALGAE    CCA           ALGAE   CCA    

         CORALLINE               CORALLINE    
 OTHER       OTHER    

      GRASS           GRASS    

EPIPHYTES  1-5  /  SILT  1-5     EPIPHYTES  1-5  /  SILT  1-5    
 

1            

2            

3            

4            

5            

6            

7            

8            

RELIEF / COMPLEXITY 1-5  DEPTH M    RELIEF / COMPLEXITY 1-5  DEPTH M   
OCEAN  INFLUENCE  1-5     OCEAN  INFLUENCE  1-5    

% MUD     /    SAND     % MUD     /    SAND    
% C SAND  /  SHELL-PEBBLE     % C SAND  /  SHELL-PEBBLE    
% RUBBLE     /     BOULDERS     % RUBBLE     /     BOULDERS    
% CONS RUBBLE    /    PAVE     % CONS RUBBLE    /    PAVE    
% CORAL   LIVE   /   DEAD     % CORAL   LIVE   /   DEAD    

SOFT /  SPONGE  /  FUNGIDS     SOFT /  SPONGE  /  FUNGIDS    
      ALGAE    CCA           ALGAE   CCA    

         CORALLINE               CORALLINE    
 OTHER       OTHER    

      GRASS           GRASS    
EPIPHYTES  1-5  /  SILT  1-5     EPIPHYTES  1-5  /  SILT  1-5    

 

106 Assessin g Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 6. Estimates of time, 
equipment and personnel 

required by survey method

Table 6.1 Time and number of people required to complete one station for each survey 
method.

Station type Time Surveyors Assistant Boat Total Total person 
operator personnel hours

Manta tow 	 1h00’ 1 1 1 3 	 3h00’
RFs 	 0h30’ 2 1 1 4 	 2h00’
RFw 	 0h40’ 2 1 3 	 2h00’
SWSs 	 1h00’ 2 1 1 4 	 4h00’
DWSs 	 1h00’ 2 1 1 4 	 4h00’
SCNs 	 1h00’ 2 1 3 	 3h00’
RBt 	 0h45’ 2 1 3 	 2h15’
SBt 	 0h45’ 2 1 3 	 2h15’
SWSt 	 1h00’ 2 1 1 4 	 4h00’
SiQ 	 0h15’ 2 1 3 	 0h45’

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 107



Appendix 6

Table 6.2 Minimum equipment needed for each survey method.
Station type Boat Total tanks Equipment

Manta tow 1 0 GPS, manta tow board with pencil, 20-m rope, data sheets, hand counter, snorkelling 
gear, wetsuit and protective gloves

RFs 1 0 GPS, two stopwatches, two writing slates with pencil, data sheets, snorkelling gear, 
wetsuit and protective gloves

RFw 1 0 GPS, two stopwatches, two writing slates with pencil, data sheets, snorkelling gear, 
wetsuit and protective gloves

SWSs 1 2** GPS, two stopwatches, two writing slates with pencil, data sheets, scuba gear, dive 
computer, wetsuit and protective gloves

DWSs 1 2 GPS, two stopwatches, two writing slates with pencil, data sheets, scuba gear, dive 
computer, wetsuit and protective gloves

SCNs 1 0 GPS, two writing slates with pencil, data sheets, snorkelling gear, wetsuit, protective 
gloves and three underwater torches

RBt 1 0 40-m transect line, weight, buoy, GPS, two writing slates with pencil, data sheets, 
snorkelling gear, wetsuit and protective gloves

SBt 1 0 40-m transect line, weight, buoy, GPS, two writing slates with pencil, data sheets, 
snorkelling gear, wetsuit and protective gloves

SWSt 1 2** GPS, two writing slates with pencil, data sheets, Chainman, scuba gear, dive 
computer, wetsuit and protective gloves

SiQ 1* 0 GPS, one writing slate with pencil, data sheets, two quadrats made of wire, booties 
or boots, protective gloves and hat

LNs GPS, two stopwatches, two writing slates with pencil, data sheets, snorkelling gear, 
wetsuit, protective gloves and three underwater torches

Crab bait GPS, two stopwatches, two writing slates with pencil, data sheets and two 
underwater torches

*	 If conditions allow, SiQ can be done from the shore, without a boat.
**	 In shallow and calm water condition, 1 tank can last two stations.

Table 6.3 Time estimates by survey method for a general invertebrate survey for all species over a site of 
approximately 50 km2.

Station Number Time Total Boat Surveyor Assistant Boat Total Person- Tanks Total 
type of per time Operator personnel hours per tanks

stations station station
Manta 12 1h00’ 12h00’ 1 1 1 1 3 36h00’ 0 0
RFs 4 0h30’ 2h00’ 1 2  1 1 4 6h00’ 0 0
RFw 4 0h40’ 2h40’ 1 2  1 3 8h00’ 0 0
SWSs 4 1h00’ 4h00’ 1 2 1 1 4 16h0’ 2 8
DWSs 3 1h00’ 3h00’ 1 2 1 1 4 12h0’ 2 6
SCNs 2 1h00’ 2h00’ 1 2  1 3 6h00’ 0 0
RBt 12 0h45’ 9h00’ 1 2  1 3 27h00’ 0 0
SBt 12 0h45’ 9h00’ 1 2  1 3 27h00’ 0 0
SWSt 4 1h00’ 4h00’ 1 2 1 1 4 16h00’ 2 8
SiQ 12 0h15’ 3h00’ 1 2 1 1 3 9h00’ 0 0
Total time equivalent 50h40’ 50h40’ 89h20’ 26h00’ 50h40’ 166h00’ 22

108 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 7. Data analysis using 
Microsoft Excel

These calculations can be generated automatically in the Reef Fisheries Integrated 
Database (RFID), if it is available for use.

Number of species present 

Using the example from Table 3 in the main text, the number of species observed at a 
site (or area of interest) is simply calculated by using the function: ‘=COUNT(D2:D24)’, 
where (D2:D24) are the cells where the total for all records for a site (or area of interest) 
are found, assuming one column contains all the species that were recorded, and 
corresponding rows contain the number of individuals of each species. To arrange the 
rank abundance using mean density: 1) select the whole data table; and 2) click on: ‘Data’ 
– ‘Sort’ – ‘Sort -‘Mean Density’, and select ‘Order’: ‘largest to smallest.’ 

Calculating mean densities from survey data

In an Excel spreadsheet, the raw data from a single station is shown in example Table 7.1, 
so this is repeated for each station from a site:

Table 7.1 Raw data of clam densities from a Manta survey site showing the data from one 
station (of many stations that were surveyed).

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 109



Appendix 7

	 Step 1

The density of clams per transect area in m2 (600 m2 each transect)
(Note this step can be left out if you are only interested in the density per hectare, in which case 
start at step 2):
î	 In column D, the number of individuals counted in each transect (from column C) is divided by 

the surface area of the transect (600 m2).
*column D = density for transect 1 in m2 
	 = C3 / 600
	 = No. clams / 600 m2

	 Step 2

The density of clams per transect converted to hectares
î	 The density of clams per m2 is converted to density per ha by using the number of clams 

per transect and multiplying this by the conversion factor (10,000 per area surveyed per 
transect), where 1 ha = 10,000 m2.

**column E = density for transect 1 in ha 
	 = (C3 x 10,000) / 600 
	 = (number of clams x 10,000) / 600 
(i.e. using the actual number of individuals)

or 	 = density for transect 1 in ha
	 = (D3) x 10,000 
	 = (density clams per m2) x 10,000 
(i.e. using the mean density m-2)

î	 These calculations should be completed for Transects 2–6.

î	 The density measure per transect is used to calculate the standing stock of a site that has a 
number of survey stations within it.

	 Step 3

The mean number of clams per hectare for station 1
î	 The mean density per station is the sum of the transect densities (per ha) divided by the 

number of transects.
Cell E10 = (SUM (E3:E8)) / 6

	 Step 4

The standard deviation (STD) of the mean per hectare for station 1
î	 The standard deviation of each station is calculated for each transect density using the Excel 

function (STDEV).
Cell E12 = STDEV (E2:E7)

	 Step 5

The number of transects (n) in station 1
î	 The count of the number of transects in a station.

Cell E12 = COUNT (B3:B8)

110 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 7

	 Step 6

The standard error (SE) of station 1 density
î	 The standard error of the station mean density is calculated from the formula (SE = SD/ √n).

Cell E13 = E11 / (SQRT (E12))
î	 These basic calculations are repeated for the number of survey stations used for the site.

î	 The function to use for calculating a mean of clams per transect, for example, is 
‘= AVERAGE (D3:D8)’, where (D3:D8) is the column where the number of clams observed in 
each individual transect is entered.

î	 The FUNCTION to use for calculating a mean, ignoring any zero (0) values is: 
= AVERAGEIF (D3:D8, “> 0”). This is the case where stations recording no individuals of the 
species of interest are excluded from the calculations (i.e. ‘Present’ mean density).

Calculation of size distribution 
To derive the frequency of individuals in each size class, use the FREQUENCY function, which is entered as 
= FREQUENCY (data_array, bins_array).
Data_array is an array value (here it is the trochus length measurements) for which you want to count 
frequencies. Bins_array is an array of intervals into which you want to group the values in data_array. 

	 Steps

(i)	 Place all length measurements (Data_Array) in a single column. 
(ii)	 Enter the size classes (maximum value for each class) or (Bins_Array) in the adjacent column 

(column C in the example below).
(iii)	 Select a number of cells in the adjacent column (column C in the example below) to the 

‘Bins_Array’ plus an extra cell below the last (highest) class size maximum. The number of 
classes in the returned array is one more than the number of classes in ‘bins_array’. The extra 
class in the returned array returns the count of any values above the highest interval.

(iv)	 Keep the cursor in the selected cells and write: =FREQUENCY(Data_Array, Bins_Array), 
then press CTRL+SHIFT+ENTER. (Select Data_Array and Bins_Array from the appropriate 
columns) (Fig. 7.1).

Figure 7.1 Size-frequency distribution from a hypothetical dataset.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 111



Appendix 7

Estimating standing stock 
The following steps are undertaken to arrive at an estimate of the standing stock of trochus based on data 
from a Pacific Island site. The following steps are followed to arrive at the final stock estimate:

(1)	 Calculate density per zone
(2)	 Estimate habitat surface area per zone
(3)	 Extrapolate trochus numbers
(4)	 Calculate confidence interval
(5)	 Calculate harvestable stock

	 Step 1

Calculation of density, standard deviation and standard error
This is explained in earlier sections of this appendix. In this example, density includes all trochus 
sizes recorded from a single survey type (RBt) conducted in a marine protected area and four 
areas open to fishing at a Pacific Island site (Table 7.2).

Table 7.2 Trochus densities by reef zones.

	 Step 2

Estimation of total reef habitat area per zone
Trochus habitat area is estimated for each zone using a map and GIS software. For a conservative 
estimate, the total reef zone area in this example has been reduced by 20% by multiplying each 
zone area by 80% (Table 7.3). 

Table 7.3 Estimated surface area of trochus habitat.

	 Step 3

Trochus population estimates
From the derived density and surface area data, estimated stock sizes can be calculated for each 
zone as in Table 7.4, with confidence interval (CI) values at 95% confidence levels. 

112 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 7

Table 7.4 Trochus stock estimates by reef zone.

Excel procedure:
Estimated stock size for each zone is derived by multiplying the mean density (ind. ha-1) (Column D) by zone 
area (Column F). For example, the estimated stock size in the marine protected area is:

= D2 x F2 
= 645.83 x 6.4
= 4,133

Overall trochus stock estimate for the site:
= Sum (G2:G6)
= 363,678

	 Step 4

Calculating confidence intervals
Excel procedure
A function is available in Excel to calculate the confidence intervals at any level of probability. The 
95% CI are derived from the ‘CONFIDENCE’ function using the station densities in earlier tables. 
Note that the STD of the mean densities is used in the CI function. This is the same STD used to 
calculate the standard error (SE).

CI are calculated by typing the function in an empty cell:
= CONFIDENCE (alpha,standard_dev,size)

Alpha is the significance level used to compute the confidence level. The confidence level equals 
100 * (1 - alpha)%; or, in other words, an alpha of 0.05 indicates a 95 percent CI. Standard_dev is the 
population STD for the data range and is assumed to be known. Size is the sample size or number 
of stations per transect surveyed (‘n’).
To calculate the 95% CI of the estimated stock size for Open Zone 1:

(1)	 First calculate the confidence interval of mean individuals per station
= CONFIDENCE (alpha, stdev, size)
= CONFIDENCE (0.05, G3, D3) (from Table 7.2)
= CONFIDENCE (0.05, 2.7, 5)
= 2.35

(2)	 Then divide by survey area and multiply by 10,000 (to convert to hectares):
= CONFIDENCE (0.05, 2.7, 5) / 240 x 10,000
= 2.35 / 240 x 10,000
= 98

(3)	 Then multiply 95% CI of mean density (ind. ha-1) by zone area to derived 95% CI for 
estimated standing stock:
=E3 x F3 (in Table 7.4)
=98 x 81.6
=7,997

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 113



Appendix 7

(4)	  Maximum and minimum confidence limits around the estimated stock size are 
calculated by adding and subtracting this value from the estimated stock size:
Maximum 95% CI for Open Zone 1:
= estimated stock size + 95% CI of estimated stock size
= 38,080 + 7,997
= 46,077 

	 Step 5

Calculating harvestable stock estimates
Harvestable stock estimates are based on stocks above legal harvest sizes according to local 
regulations on legal minimum or maximum sizes where available, or a similar recommended size 
range if legal harvest sizes are not available. In this example, harvestable trochus sizes are between 
80 mm and 110 mm basal diameter, and two harvest levels of 20% and 30% of the total estimates 
stock within this harvest size limits are provided for decision-making options. The proportion of 
the population of legal size (80–110 mm = 53%) was estimated from size frequency data and 4 wet 
harvestable trochus shells are assumed to weigh 1 kg (4 wet legal size trochus = 1 kg weight).

Table 7.5 Harvestable stock estimate trochus fishery.

53% = legal harvest proportion based on size frequency; 20% or 30% = recommended harvest proportion.

Legal size stock estimate by zones
= Estimated stock size (C3) x proportion legal size (53%) for Open Zone 1 
= 38,080 x 0.53 
= 20,182 individuals

Harvest proportion at 20% for Open Zone 1
= Legal size stock estimate (F3) x 20% 
= 20,182 x 0.2 
= 4,036 individuals

Harvest proportion at 30% for Open Zone 1
= Legal size stock estimate (F3) x 30% 
= 20,182 x 0.3 
= 6,055 individuals

	 Step 6

Converting stock estimate into weight estimate
The estimated wet weight for 20% of harvest stock for Zone 1 = 4,036 individuals trochus divided 
by 4 (4 shells = 1 kg) = 1,009 kg or 1.009 tonnes of wet trochus. Conversion of wet weight to dry 
weight can also be worked out if the number of empty shells per kg is known. 

114 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 7

In the above example, estimated harvestable quantities have been calculated based on the estimated stock 
size. For extra precaution, harvestable sizes could be calculated based on the lower 95% CI values. Using the 
data from the above example, this more conservative approach would equate as follows: 

Legal size stock estimate by zones
= Lower 95% CI estimated stock size (D3) x proportion legal size (53%) for Open Zone 1 
= 30,083 x 0.53 
= 15,949 individuals

Harvest proportion at 20% for Open Zone 1
= Legal size stock estimate x 20% 
= 15,949 x 0.2 
= 3,189 individuals

Harvest proportion at 30% for Open Zone 1
= Legal size stock estimate x 30% 
= 15,949 x 0.3 
= 4,783 individuals

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 115



116 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers



Appendix 8. Conversion ratio for 
length and weight of live and 
dried sea cucumber products 

and dry pieces per kilogram

Conversion ratios are used to convert dry lengths or weight to wet lengths or weight 
and vice versa. Regional conversion ratios have been developed for some species by the 
Secretariat of the Pacific Community based on past work in some locations for use in the 
absence of local conversion ratios and as a basis for developing site-specific wet:dry ratios.

Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers 117



Appendix 8

118 Assessing Tropical Marine Invertebrates: a Manual for Pacific Island Resource Managers

Table 8.1 Conversion table for live and dry lengths and weights of sea cucumbers, and maximum dry pieces per kilogram.

Common name Scientific name Code Mean live Mean live Mean dry Wet to dry Conversion Maximum dry 
length (cm) weight (g) weight (g) recovery rate (%) ratio pieces per kg

Greenfish Stichopus chloronotus GF 22 300 9.00 3.0 0.030 115
Deepwater redfish Actinopyga echinites DWRF 20 400 22.00 5.5 0.055 45
Hairy blackfish Actinopyga miliaris HBF n/a 500 27.50 5.5 0.050 37
Stonefish Actinopyga lecanora STF 18 650 35.75 5.5 0.055 30
Sandfish Holothuria scabra SF 22 750 37.50 5.0 0.050 28
Tigerfish / Leopardfish Bohadschia argus TF 35 1,000 40.00 4.0 0.040 27
Brown sandfish Bohadschia vitiensis BSF 30 1,000 40.00 4.0 0.040 26
Surf redfish Actinopyga mauritiana SRF 20 850 46.75 5.5 0.055 22
Golden sandfish Holothuria versicolor GSF 30 1,400 70.00 5.0 0.050 15
Curryfish Stichopus herrmanni CF 38 2,100 84.00 4.0 0.040 14
Deepwater blackfish Actinopyga palauensis PBF n/a 1,500 82.50 5.5 0.055 12
Black teatfish Holothuria whitmaei BTF 30 2,400 168.00 7.0 0.070 6
Prickly redfish Thelenota ananas PRF 55 3,500 175.00 5.0 0.050 6
White teatfish Holothuria fuscogilva WTF 38 2,500 200.00 8.0 0.080 5
Amberfish Thelenota anax AF 55 3,500 192.50 5.5 0.055 5
Elephant trunkfish Holothuria fuscopuncatata ET 45 2,000 200.00 10.0 0.100 5