European Marine Omics Biodiversity 
Observation Network  

(EMO BON) 

Handbook

EMBRC-ERIC, 4 Place Jussieu, Tour 46/00, 75005 Paris 
www.embrc.eu 



 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network (EMO 
BON) – Handbook 

Ioulia Santi1,2, Raffaella Casotti3, Thierry Comtet4, Michael Cunliffe5, Yolanda Koulouri2, Lara Macheriotou6, 
Fabrice Not4, Matthias Obst7, Christina Pavloudi2, Sarah Romac4, Eric Thiebaut4, Jan Vanaverbeke8, Nicolas 
Pade1 

1 European Marine Biological Resource Centre (EMBRC-ERIC), Paris, France 

2 Hellenic Centre for Marine Research (HCMR), Institute of Marine Biology, Biotechnology and Aquaculture 
(IMBBC), Heraklion, Greece 

3 Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Napoli, Italy 

4 Sorbonne University, CNRS, Biologique de Roscoff, Roscoff, France 

5 Marine Biological Association of the UK, School of Biological and Marine Sciences, University of Plymouth, 
Plymouth, UK 

6 Marine Biology Research Group, Department of Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium  

7 Department of Marine Sciences, University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden 

8 Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences, Operational Directorate Natural Environment (OD Nature), 
Marine Ecology and Management (MARECO), Brussels, Belgium 

 

 

 

Version 1.0 

April 2021 

 

Contact: 

Ioulia Santi  

European Marine Biological 
Resource Centre 
Paris Headquarters 
4 Place Jussieu, 
Tour 46/00, 1er étage, bureau 101 
75252 Paris Cedex 05 (FR) 
www.embrc.eu 

Email: ioulia.santi@embrc.eu 
Phone: +30 2 81 03 37 727 
Mobile: +30 6 94 51 78 545 

 

How to cite: 

Ioulia Santi, Raffaella Casotti, Thierry Comtet, Michael Cunliffe, Yolanda Koulouri, Lara Macheriotou, Fabrice Not, Matthias Obst, Christina 
Pavloudi, Sarah Romac, Eric Thiebaut, Jan Vanaverbeke, Nicolas Pade. European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network (EMO 
BON) – Handbook. Version 1.0, 2021.  

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 1 



 

Table of Contents 
Summary ........................................................................................................................... 3 

Introduction ....................................................................................................................... 4 

Participation to EMO BON ............................................................................................... 6 

Sampling Protocols .......................................................................................................... 7 

Water Column .......................................................................................................................... 10 

Water Column Standard Operating Procedures 1 ‒ WaSOP 1 (basic) .................................. 10 

Water Column Standard Operating Procedures 2 ‒ WaSOP 2 (optional) .............................. 18 

Water Column Standard Operating Procedures 3 ‒ WaSOP 3 (optional) .............................. 23 

Soft Substrate.......................................................................................................................... 28 

Soft Substrate Standard Operating Procedures 1 ‒ SoSOP 1 (intertidal sediments).............. 28 

Soft substrate Standard Operating Procedures 2 ‒ SoSOP 2 (coastal sediments by diving) . 35 

Soft substrate Standard Operating Procedures 3 ‒ SoSOP 3 (coastal sediments by research 
vessel) ................................................................................................................................... 36 

Hard Substrate ........................................................................................................................ 43 

Hard Substrate Standard Operating Procedures ‒ HaSOP .................................................... 43 

Sample Labelling ............................................................................................................ 47 

Collection and Documentation of Metadata ................................................................. 49 

DNA extraction ................................................................................................................ 53 

Sequencing ..................................................................................................................... 54 

Replication and Biobanking .......................................................................................... 55 

Calibration efforts ........................................................................................................... 56 

References ...................................................................................................................... 57 

Appendix 1: Materials and equipment .......................................................................... 58 

Specifications of filters and filter holders ................................................................................ 58 

DESS recipe .......................................................................................................................... 58 

Hydrochloric acid (HCl) 10% recipe ....................................................................................... 58 

Bleach (sodium hypochlorite, NaClO) 10% recipe ................................................................. 59 

Appendix 2: Samples Summary .................................................................................... 60 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 2 



 

Summary 
The European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network (EMO BON) is a European initiative 
from the European Marine Biological Resource Centre (EMBRC) to establish a coordinated, long-
term biodiversity observatory. Currently there are many ongoing genomic observation stations in 
Europe. The goal for EMO BON is to support the individual marine biodiversity observatories within 
EMBRC and connect them under one centrally coordinated network, with shared protocols, data, 
and metadata standards. EMBRC provides the context and opportunity for partner institutions to 
participate and complement EMO BON by initiating biodiversity observation stations. EMO BON 
includes marine stations from Polar regions to the Red Sea that will sample for genomic marine 
biodiversity at frequent intervals. This network will contribute to the United Nations Decade of Ocean 
Science for Sustainable Development and aims to be an important European component to the 
global ocean observation networks. 

Collection of marine water, sediment and organisms will take place at the EMBRC participating 
observatory stations according to the protocols described in this document – the EMO BON 
Handbook – setting a minimum standard for participation to the network. DNA extraction and 
sequencing will be performed at a centralised facility to reduce biases and ensure consistency in 
the high-quality of sequencing. The data generated within this initiative will follow the FAIR data 
principles. The life cycle of the EMO BON data will be described in detail in the EMO BON Data 
Management Plan. Overall, EMBRC aims to build a long-term genomic observatory, generating 
cost-effective, high-quality, baseline genomic biodiversity data that will be produced in the long term. 

This Handbook contains all the guidelines and procedures from sampling to sequencing that will be 
followed within EMO BON. The purpose of this document is not only to ensure the rigorous adhesion 
to the appropriate protocols within EMO BON, but also to provide all the necessary information to 
potential external participants from the wider scientific community. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 3 



 

Introduction 
Marine ecosystems are rich and complex, hosting a diverse array of life from the smallest 
microorganisms to the largest mammals. Together, this biodiversity sustains marine ecosystems 
and provides services to human society as well as an inherent natural beauty. Restoring and 
protecting biodiversity is critical today as the wellbeing of humans is tightly linked to fauna, flora, and 
ecosystem health. The health and status of marine biodiversity is becoming of increasing concern 
because of a range of impacts, including climate change and pollution. The marine environment and 
its biodiversity are proving to be even more susceptible than previously believed, with increasing 
losses of biodiversity observed as temperature increases (Smale et al., 2019; Antão et al., 2020). 
Eventually, holistic knowledge on marine biodiversity is essential for fully understanding the ocean 
(Muller-Karger et al., 2018). 

Across the European Union, the political will to allay environmental damage while protecting and 
restoring natural ecosystems is growing, with promising and ambitious plans proposed to reduce 
environmental impact and mitigate climate change (European Green Deal), and with pledges to 
restore degraded ecosystems and biodiversity (European Biodiversity Strategy for 2030).  Policy 
makers require focused, sustained, consistent, quality-controlled, and transparent information with 
regional coverage to rapidly detect the impact of their management and policy decisions on 
biodiversity. Nowadays, at the European level, data on marine biodiversity are fragmented and 
targeted at specific research questions. Furthermore, with the increased need to understand and 
minimize anthropogenic impact on the oceans, policy makers need biological monitoring to provide 
operational input to their decision-making processes. 

To move towards a sustainable and environmentally conscious society, it is urgent that we rapidly 
develop and organize marine biodiversity observing capabilities to complement the well-organised 
physio-chemical observation networks (Heymans et al., 2020). There is a need for regional coverage 
of established long-term biodiversity series, where traditional methods and emerging techniques are 
combined (Claudet et al., 2020). Finally, biological data need to adopt a rigorous approach to 
protocols and quality control to ensure the replicability of experiments and models. 

Omics biodiversity defined as the collective identification of the species composition of an ecosystem 
by using molecular biology omics approaches such as metagenomics and metabarcoding, is a 
global point of discussion. Recognizing the need to continuously assess biodiversity, many 
organisations and research infrastructures are expressing interest in establishing such an 
observation network. 

The core mission of EMBRC is to provide access to marine biodiversity for research and innovation 
purposes.  As a multi-domain research infrastructure, supporting both environmental and biological 
research, EMBRC can pave the path to biological observation in the marine environment. Therefore, 
as a contribution to the global omics observation, in 2021 EMBRC launches the first coordinated, 
long-term European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network (EMO BON). EMO-BON will 
provide long-term baseline genomic biodiversity data, supporting biodiversity and EOVs (Essential 
Ocean Variables) and EBVs (Essential Biological Variables) monitoring, and ensuring continuity 
between the many current short-term genomics observatory projects. EMO BON will build on robust 
methodologies and produce cross-checked and quality-controlled datasets following appropriate 
data and metadata standards. By establishing EMO BON, EMBRC will mobilise a substantial 
network and bring transformation to the marine biological science landscape. Long-term observation 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 4 



 

will provide the backbone of large research projects and initiatives, from ocean science, and climate 
change to microbiome research and bioprospecting.  

Several EMBRC nodes are already carrying out genomic observation and have brought 
considerable expertise on the subject. EMO BON will support the individual marine biodiversity 
observatories present in EMBRC and connect them under one centrally coordinated network, thus 
creating one of the few operational genomics observatory networks in the world. By widening the 
distribution of the observatories along the European coastline, EMBRC can ensure a unique and 
broad coverage of habitats and longitudes from northern Norway to tropical Israel. In addition, 
EMBRC is involved in the international community, which has been heavily engaged in the 
conceptualization and development of genomic observation. Therefore, EMBRC observatory will be 
operational in Europe, but relevant in a global context drawing users of the planned outputs from 
around the planet. 

To launch the initiative, 2021 and 2022 will serve as pilot years to establish and improve operational 
procedures, create, and apply a data management plan based on FAIR principles and, build the 
tools required to publish the produced data in a useful manner to all end users. These two years will 
serve as the baseline to establish the future operation of EMO BON and its position in the global 
marine observation roadmap. 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 5 



 

Participation to EMO BON 
EMO BON will initiate in 2021 and operate as a pilot until December 2022. For this period, selected 
EMBRC partner institutions are invited to establish operational observatories. The selection of 
partners was done to obtain a broad geographic distribution and to include representatives from 
each EMBRC node. After the pilot phase, the geographical coverage will be expanded by including 
additional observatory stations. Observatories are invited to select their sampling sites and provide 
information to EMBRC by filling in the EMO BON registration form.  

Three different marine habitats will be sampled within the EMO BON: water column, soft substrates, 
and hard substrates. The observatories are expected to participate by sampling the water column 
as a minimum and they may also select whether to sample soft and/or hard substrates. Therefore, 
they may select a water column, a soft substrate, and a hard substrate site to include to their EMO 
BON observatory. It is recommended that observatories select sampling sites that have been 
studied in the past and that are well characterized (i.e., include other marine variables such as 
seawater chemistry and/or biological components). Prior knowledge on the system will help putting 
EMO BON data in a broader context and will result into an integrated study of the sites. Therefore, 
in case EMBRC partner institutions run long term time series of biological data, it is recommended 
that EMO BON sampling is carried out at the same sites. In addition, it is suggested that the sampling 
sites of the different habitats are located near each other or at least in the same marine area, if 
possible. 

Participating institutions should decide on a name and a short ID for their observatory that will be 
maintained for the duration of EMO BON and will characterize all samples collected at this 
observatory. A contact person should be appointed who will be responsible for any future 
communication. This person should hold all information regarding sampling campaigns, samples 
collection, laboratory analyses, shipping, environmental variable measurements and will be the link 
between EMO BON coordinators and the observatory. The contact person should be reachable for 
an extended period after sampling. 

An EMO BON Operating Committee (OpCo) will be established and comprise of the EMBRC 
executive director, the EMBRC EMO BON science officer, one representative from each EMBRC 
node, and one representative from the e-Infrastructures EMBRC working group. The OpCo will 
ensure connection and communication with all its national observatories. A member of the EMBRC 
General Assembly will also follow the OpCo during the pilot phase. The OpCo will be the connection 
between EMO BON coordinators and the observatories and will be meeting monthly to tackle 
technical and operational issues. 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 6 



 

Sampling Protocols 
Three different marine habitats will be sampled within the EMO BON: water column, soft substrates, 
and hard substrates. Considering the diverse interests, experience, and equipment within EMBRC, 
this handbook contains different sampling modules ranging from simplified to more complex and 
time demanding. The basic water column procedure is the only prerequisite for participating in the 
observatories network. All other protocols are included to help guide the decision on future protocols 
that observatories may wish to add depending on their local interests.  

All modules are based on robust methodologies that generate reliable and versatile data and have 
been priorly tested either in the EMBRC operating marine stations or through other EMBRC activities 
[ASSEMBLE Plus: Ocean Sampling Day (OSD) and Autonomous Reef Monitoring Structures 
(ARMS)]. Considerable effort has been put into making the methodologies as flexible and adaptable 
as possible to accommodate all the observatories chosen for the pilot phase. The standardization 
of the sampling procedures is important to avoid biases and to produce comparable results; thus, 
EMO BON participating observatory stations should adhere to the Standardized Operating 
Procedures (SOPs) described in this Handbook. Using the protocols in this Handbook will allow for 
interoperability and comparability between observatory stations. In addition, EMBRC will organize 
training workshops for its members and beyond, to support users during the sampling and laboratory 
procedures and to ensure consistency in the implementation of the procedures. 

During the pilot phase in 2021 and 2022, EMO BON will focus on creating and maintaining the 
network of observatories, applying and testing methodologies and procedures, producing high 
quality datasets, and generate a robust data management plan based on FAIR principles. In this 
initial phase it is important to give perspective to this network and make it operational for the ongoing 
decade. For a successful and cost-effective implementation phase EMO BON will have to 
concentrate the efforts to a broad geographic coverage and the sampling of diverse habitats rather 
than the thorough sampling of fewer sites. Therefore, EMO BON will cover the sampling based on 
one SOP per sampled habitat and a fixed number of ARMS deployments. Particularly for the water 
column, Water Column Standard Operating Procedures 1 (WaSOP 1 basic) will be covered as 
a prerequisite for participation to the network. In addition, each observatory may select one of the 
Soft Substrate Standard Operating Procedures (SoSOPs) to sample the communities of choice 
(microorganisms and/or meiobenthos and/or macrobenthos). For Hard Substrates Standard 
Operating Procedures (HaSOP), it will be possible to deploy ARMS three times in one year. The 
additional SOPs are included in the Handbook not only as future approaches but also to help 
standardization for any observatory who wishes to establish further operational procedures. 
Observatories are welcome to follow them and either perform in-house analyses or biobank the 
samples. This approach will be re-evaluated by the EMO BON OpCo and the EMBRC General 
Assembly at the end of the pilot phase. 

The different habitats will be sampled at different time intervals; this information is summarized in 
Table 1. Water column sampling events will take place at the participating operating stations once 
every two months during daytime hours. There will be three modules for genomic biodiversity 
sampling of water column. Water Column Standard Operating Procedures 1 (WaSOP 1 basic) 
will represent the basic module for water column sampling within EMO BON. It includes sequential 
filtration for the collection of different sized microbial plankton organisms. With equipping the 
appropriate filtration apparatuses, seawater filtration becomes simplified while ensuring adequate 
biomass collection at minimum processing time. This protocol will constitute the EMBRC contribution 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 7 



 

to European marine genomics observation and is the prerequisite for participating in the network. 
All EMO BON participating stations are expected to follow this basic protocol.  

In addition to the basic water column sampling (WaSOP 1 basic), EMOBON participating stations 
may wish to optionally perform WaSOP 2 and/or WaSOP 3. WaSOP 2 and WaSOP 3 target plankton 
organisms of larger sizes (micro-, meso- and macro-plankton) and include the use of plankton nets. 
These protocols are included to assist observatories that are interested in sampling larger in size 
plankton but cannot be covered by EMO BON during the pilot phase. After the pilot phase, the 
possibilities of covering the costs of further SOPs will be re-evaluated. 

Soft substrate sampling will be based on different modules, depending on the sampling capacities 
of each operating station. Participating stations that have access to intertidal sediments are 
encouraged to sample such suitable sites using the Soft Substrate Standard Operating 
Procedures 1 for intertidal sediments (SoSOP 1). If access to intertidal sediments is limited or 
unfeasible, operating stations may choose between SoSOP 2 for sampling by diving or SoSOP 3 
for sampling onboard a research vessel. Operating stations are to select one or more modules for 
soft substrate sampling and maintain it for the duration of EMO BON. Each of the Soft Substrate 
SOPs describes the collection of samples to access the microbial community, the meiobenthos and 
the macrobenthos. Participating stations may sample any of the communities they are interested in. 

Sampling intervals will be different for the various soft substrate communities since the dynamics of 
each community are different (Table 1). Sampling for sediment microbial communities will take place 
once every two months, sampling for meiobenthos once every 4 months while macrobenthos 
sampling will take place twice a year. 

Table 1: Sampling intervals for the different modules and sampled communities  

Water Column Once every two months 

(February, April, June, August, October, December) 

Soft substrate - Microbial community Once every two months 

(February, April, June, August, October, December) 

Soft substrate - Meiobenthos community Once every four months 

(April, June, October) 

Soft substrate - Macrobenthos community Twice a year 

(October, April) 

ARMS deployment / retrieval Flexible timeframe for operating stations 

The Hard Substrates Standard Operating Procedures (HaSOP) describes the passive sampling 
of hardbottom communities based on the Autonomous Reef Monitoring Structures Marine 
Biodiversity Observation Network (ARMS-MBON). This module requires the purchase of ARMS 
units from the Smithsonian Institution (https://www.oceanarms.org/) and their deployment in the sea. 
The procedures described here have been continuously and successfully employed during the 
ASSEMBLE Plus ARMS-MBON project (Obst et al., 2020). Operating stations may adopt different 
sampling strategies for the deployment and retrieval of ARMS for the hard substrate samplings. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 8 



 

However, it is important that the sampling variations are well documented and linked to the dataset 
as metadata. 

The deployment and recovery of ARMS may be challenging for inexperienced users. Therefore, 
observatories not familiar with ARMS protocols need to be trained in the deployment, recovery, and 
data collection. This will be done by participating in a hard substrate sampling in an experienced 
observatory before being able to apply HaSOP in EMO BON. EMO BON may help bring new and 
experienced observatories in contact. EMBRC plans to host training events within the pilot phase of 
EMO BON for additional training on sampling and laboratory procedures. 

  

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 9 



 

Water Column 

Water Column Standard Operating Procedures 1 ‒ WaSOP 1 (basic) 

Summary 

Subsurface seawater (0-3 m depth) will be collected from the water column sampling site of each 
observatory. The exact water sampling depth is not specified as observatories may not be able to 
sample at a specific depth. In case an observatory can sample at specified seawater depth, then 
sampling at 1 m depth is recommended. Plankton community will be prefiltered to screen out 
organisms >200 μm and then concentrated by sequential filtration on polycarbonate (PC) membrane 
filters. Initially seawater volumes will be filtered through 3 µm polycarbonate membrane filters (142 
mm in diameter); the outflow seawater will be sequentially filtered through 0.2 µm polycarbonate 
membrane filters (142 mm in diameter). This will result in collecting 2 different fractions of plankton: 
3-200 μm and 0.2-3 μm organisms. 

The required seawater volume to ensure adequate biomass collection may vary between geographic 
locations. The observatories may decide on the filtration volume based on the characteristics of their 
sampling site and on previous filtration experience in the area. As an indication, in the oligotrophic 
open-sea, filtration volumes may reach 20 l, while in nearshore coastal areas filtration of 5 l may be 
adequate. However, it is important that operating stations filter the same seawater volume in every 
sampling event to obtain consistency among samples from each location. EMBRC can provide 
further guidance on selecting filtration volumes upon request. 

After filtration, each filter membrane will be cut into two pieces by using a sterile scalpel and each 
piece will represent one replicate. In total 4 replicates should be collected (more information in 
Replication and Biobanking section, a diagram representation is available in Figure 11); that is, 2 
separate sequential filtrations will take place and the cutting of each filter into two will result in 4 
replicates. Filtration should be performed by delicate pumping either using a peristaltic pump or by 
manual hand pumping. After filtration, membranes should be left to dry, carefully folded, placed in 
individual containers with the preservative DNA/RNA shield, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored 
at -80oC until shipping for further analysis. 

Filtration may initiate in the field immediately after sampling or following the transportation of the 
sampled seawater to the laboratory. Seawater should remain in a cool dark place during 
transportation and until filtration. It is important to be consistent to when the filtration takes place 
among the different sampling events, therefore observatories are expected to either always filter in 
the field or always transport water and filter in the lab. For a diagram representation of the 
procedures see Appendix 2. 

Protocol 

A. Materials, equipment, and supplies 

Before starting, ensure all materials equipment, and supplies are available by checking the following 
table (Table 2). 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 10 



 

Table 2: List of materials, equipment, and supplies for WaSOP 1. 

10% HCl 

0.2 μm prefiltered seawater 

Purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) 

Gloves 

50 ml screw cap tubes 

Aluminium foil 

Wash bottles 

Forceps 

Scalpel 

Peristaltic pump and pump heads / manual hand pump 1 

Appropriate silicone tubes (adjustable to the pump and the filtration apparatuses) 

Stainless steel filtration apparatuses (tripods), 142 mm (see Appendix 1)  

Polycarbonate hydrophilic membranes, 3 μm pore size, 142 mm in diameter (see Appendix 1) 

Polycarbonate hydrophilic membranes, 0.2 μm pore size, 142 mm in diameter (see Appendix 1) 

5 ml cryotubes 

Permanent marker 

Transparent tape 

Niskin bottle / bucket / hand pump 2 

200 μm mesh 

Sample containers of appropriate volume (carboys or Nalgene-type bottles, depending on the 
seawater sampling volume at each observatory) 

Funnel 

Parafilm or shrink film 

DNA/RNA Shield 

Pipette (1000-5000 μl) and suitable tips 

Access to liquid N2 

Access to -80oC 

1 The filtration may take place by a peristaltic pump or a manual hand pump. However, filtration 
using a manual hand pump is feasible only at small seawater volumes. At seawater volumes 
larger than 2 l, it is highly recommended to use a peristaltic pump. 

2 For the collection of seawater it is recommended to equip Niskin bottles. However, depending on 
the equipment availability at each observatory, it may also take place using a bucket of a hand 
pump. 

 

 

 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 11 



 

B. Preparation and Cleaning 

• Always wear gloves. 

• Prepare 10% HCl. 

• Clean the workspace using 10% HCl. 

• Filter seawater at 0.2 μm to prepare 0.2-prefiltered seawater. Ideally this should be seawater 
from the sampling site. 

• Prepare a wash bottle filled with 0.2-prefiltered seawater. 

• Prepare a 50 ml screw cap tube filled with 10% HCl and a 50 ml screw cap tube filled with 0.2-
prefiltered seawater. Soak forceps and scalpel in the HCl tube and then in the 0.2-prefiltered 
seawater tube before every use. Store forceps in the 10% HCl tube after use. 

• Follow the manufracturer’s instructions for proper cleaning and maintenance of the filtration 
apparatuses and the peristaltic pump. Clean the peristaltic pump with paper towel humidified 
with tapwater before and after use. 

• Filtration apparatuses and tubes are cleaned at the end of each sampling event and if allowed 
to dry and stored properly (i.e., tube ends covered, tripod tube inlets/outlets covered, interior of 
the tripod does not touch other surfaces, all parts are left to dry) there is no need to clean again. 
It is recommended to rinse all parts of the filtration apparatuses using 70% ethanol after use and 
allow them to dry overnight. 

• After each filtration sequence, the system is cleaned by passing purified water (Milli-Q or 
Nanopure) through. 

• Never touch the filter (not even with gloves on). 

• Avoid touching the inside of the filtration apparatuses. 

• Prepare the appropriate volume of purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) to be used as negative 
control (see below, Negative Controls section).  

• Clean sampling equipment (Niskin bottle and/or buckets) using tap water. Rinse vigorously and 
make sure material from previous samplings is washed away. Cleaning of sampling equipment 
(Niskin bottle and/or buckets) may also take place at the end of every sampling event. Make 
sure that equipment was cleaned and stored properly before using it. 

• Rinse the 200 μm mesh and funnels vigorously with tap water and purified water (Milli-Q or 
Nanopure). Make sure material from previous samplings is washed away. Cleaning of the 200 
μm mesh and funnels may also take place at the and of every sampling event. Make sure that 
materials were cleaned and stored properly before using them. 

• Clean the sample containers (carboys or or Nalgene-type bottles) by incubating overnight with 
10% HCl. The following day wash twice using distilled water and twice using purified water (Milli-
Q or Nanopure). Rinse vigorously to ensure all interior surfaces are cleaned and acid is washed 
away. Cleaning and decontamination of the sample containers (carboys or or Nalgene-type 
bottles) may also take place at the and of every sampling event. Make sure they were cleaned 
and stored properly before using them. 

C. Setting up 

Follow the manufacturer’s instructions for fully setting up the filtration apparatuses and the pump. 
Here, only a brief description is included, considering that a peristaltic pump is used. The equipment 
set up is described in the following sketch (Figure 1). In addition, a filtration workspace is depicted 
in Figure 2. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 12 



 

 

Figure 1: Set up of the water column filtration equipment. The sampled seawater is collected in a container. A peristaltic 
pump is passing the seawater through the system. Seawater is first passing through a 142 mm filtration apparatus 
equipped with a 3 μm PC filter and subsequently through a 142 mm filtration apparatus equipped with a 0.2 μm PC filter. 
The seawater is transported through appropriate tubes that connect the seawater container to the peristaltic pump and the 
filtration apparatuses. 

Set up the filtration apparatuses (tripods) as described below: 

1. Open the tripod filter holders. Avoid touching the inside of the filter holders. 

2. Humidify filter holder area of filtration tripods using 0.2 µm filtered seawater (Figure 3). 

3. Soak forceps in the HCl tube and then in the 0.2-prefiltered seawater tube before every use. 
Handle the filter with the forceps not by hand. 

4. Place a PC filter membrane (3 µm pore size; 142 mm diameter) on the first tripod and a 0.2 µm 
pore size PC filter membrane (142 mm diameter) on the second tripod using forceps (Figure 4). 
Each PC filter is separated by 2 blue inter-filters in the filter boxes. Make sure to remove the 
blue inter-filters or the water will not go through. Filters are polarized and both sides can be 
used. 

5. Close the tripods (Figure 5), tighten the hand knobs and connect the inlet and outlet tubes. 

6. Connect the inlet tube of the first filtration tripod (3 µm filter membrane) to the peristaltic pump 
and cover it using aluminium foil until filtration.  

7. Connect the outlet tube of the first filtration tripod (3 µm filter membrane) to the inlet of the 
second filtration tripod (0.2 µm filter membrane). 

8. Connect the outlet of the second filtration tripod (0.2 µm filter membrane) to a tube and place 
the tube in a waste container or in the sink. 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 13 



 

 

Figure 2: Set up of the water column filtration equipment (peristaltic pump, filtration apparatuses (tripods), tubing system, 
seawater collection carboys) on the laboratory bench. 

 

 

  
Figure 4: Open filtration tripod with a filter membrane placed 

Figure 3: Open filtration tripod and humidified filter holder. 
on it. 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 14 



 

 
Figure 5: Open (left) and close (right) filtration tripods. 

D. Seawater Collection 

1. If a bucket is used to collect seawater, rinse it three times with seawater from the sampling site. 
The Niskin bottle is washed with seawater while on use.  

2. Rinse the funnel, and the sample containers three times with seawater from the sampling site. 

3. Sample seawater below the sea surface between 0-3 m. Make sure not to sample sea surface 
water. Collect the appropriate volume of seawater using the Niskin bottles. Seawater may also 
be collected by hand-pumping or by using a bucket. 

4. The required seawater volume differs among observatories. As two sequential filtrations will 
take place, sample twice the required volume. For example, if an observatory has decided to 
sample and filter 10 l of seawater, then 20 l of seawater should be sampled in total and, in step 
5, transferred in two 10 l containers. 

5. Adjust a large piece of 200 μm mesh on a funnel and place it on the sample container mouth.  

6. Transfer seawater in the sample containers through the mesh and the funnel. Each of the 
sample containers will be used for a separate filtration sequence. Therefore, each sample 
container should include the required volume for one filtration. For example, if an observatory 
has decided to sample and filter 10 l of seawater, then each of the two sample containers should 
contain 10 l of the 20 l of seawater that was collected (step 3). Wash the 200 μm mesh before 
filling up the second sample container to remove retained material. 

7. Filtration should initiate as soon as possible after sampling. Sampled seawater may be 
transported to the laboratory if filtration in the field is not possible. Keep each of the sample 
containers in a dark and cool place until filtration. 

E. Seawater Filtration and Sample Storage 

1. Mix the sample containers gently by rotating at least 5 times. 

2. Place the inlet tube of the first filtration tripod (3 µm filter membrane) in the first sample container 
and immerse it in the seawater. 

3. Cover the mouth of the sampling container during filtration. The container does not need to be 
firmly closed, just enough to ensure that external material will not fall in. For example, cover the 
container using parafilm or shrink film. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 15 



 

4. Check the pumping speed and the flow direction and turn on the peristaltic pump. Flow rate 
should be adjusted to ensure a regular gentle continuous seawater flow. 

5. Always initiate the filtration sequence with the filter holder vents open. Wait until all air bubbles 
get expulsed from the filter holders through the vents and once the water flows regularly through 
the vents, close them. 

6. Seawater will be filtered sequentially through two filter membranes, first through the 3 μm and 
subsequently through the 0.2 μm pore size membrane. 

7. Check the tubing system and the filtration tripod connections regularly for overpressure that 
may damage the cells and/or the filtration system. If pressure is too high, decrease the flow 
rate. 

8. Check for the presence of bubbles and use the filter holder vents to expulse them. 

9. Ensure membranes always remain moistened during filtration. 

10. After filtration, it is important to allow the filters to dry. To do that: 

a. Keep the pump on and allow the system to pump air. 

b. Disconnect the tube after the second tripod (0.2 μm tripod). 

c. Empty the tube between the pump and the first tripod (3 μm tripod) by lifting it up. 

d. Slowly open the vent of the second tripod (0.2 μm tripod) and empty the tube between the 
two tripods by “waving it” a few times.  

e. Close the vent of the second tripod (0.2 μm tripod). All the seawater that remained on the 
second tripod filter will be pushed out by the increasing pressure. 

f. Gently shake each tripod to make sure there is no water trapped in the filter holder.  

g. Slowly open both vents while turning the peristaltic pump off. 

11. Open the tripod filter holders. Avoid touching the inside of the filter holder area. 

12. Use the forceps to handle the filter. Soak forceps in the HCl tube and then in the 0.2-prefiltered 
seawater tube before every use. 

13. To avoid contaminations, cut rapidly the filter into 2 visually equal pieces by using a sterile 
scapel, after placing it on a clean, hard surface (e.g. in a Petri dish). 

14. Immediately fold each piece twice and then fold again by rolling the filter in a cylinder. The two 
filter pieces will be the sample replicates. 

15. Carefully place the filters into separate 5 ml cryotubes and gently push the filters to the bottom 
of the tube to minimize the space they occupy in the tube. Do not crumble the filter, just try to 
gently fold it once more while in the tube. 

16. Add 4.5 ml of DNA/RNA Shield by using a pipette and make sure the filter is covered by the 
solution. 

17. Label the tube appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). Each 
filtration produces two sample replicates; therefore after 2 filtrations, 4 replicated samples will 
be produced. The first filtration (for example, filtration A) will produce replicates 1 and 2 when 
filter A is cut in half. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 16 



 

18. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

19. Transfer tubes into liquid N2 for flash freezing and subsequently store at -80oC. 

20. Close the tripod and clean the filtration system by passing 2 l of purified water (Milli-Q or 
Nanopure). Place new filters in the filtration tripods as described in the setting up section and 
close the tripods. 

21. Repeat steps 1-15 once more to filter all the collected seawater. Each filtration produces two 
sample replicates; therefore after 2 filtrations, 4 replicated samples will be produced. The first 
filtration (for example, filtration A) will produce replicates 1 and 2 when filter A is cut in half. The 
second filtration (for example, filtration B) will produce replicates 3 and 4 when filter B is cut in 
half.  

22. Store the filter pieces for replicates 3 and 4 in 5 ml cryotubes without the addition of DNA/RNA 
Shield. Replicates 3 and 4 will be stored for biobanking. 

23. Label the tube appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section).  

24. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

25. Transfer tubes into liquid N2 for flash freezing and subsequently store at -80oC. 

F. Negative Controls 

As samples undergo different procedures at the operating stations and at the centralized sequencing 
centre laboratories, it is important to check for contaminations. For this reason, blank samples will 
be collected and processed together with the actual samples to serve as negative controls. The 
collection of the blank samples will take place after the seawater filtrations to account for the cleaning 
of the filtration apparatuses between different samples. After the seawater filtration follow the steps 
bellow to collect and store the negative control sample.  

1. After the second filtration, close the tripod and clean the filtration system by passing 2 l of 
purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure). 

2. Place new filters in the filtration tripods as described in the setting up section above (Setting up 
steps 1-4) and close the tripods. 

3. Filter purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure). The volume of the purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) 
to be filtered should be equal to the volume of seawater filtered for one filtration. For example, 
if an observatory has decided to sample and filter 10 l of seawater in one filtration sequence, 
then 10 l of purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) should be filtered for the negative control as 
well. 

4. Follow filtration procedure as described in the seawater filtration section (E. Seawater Filtration 
and Sample Storage, steps 6-10). 

5. Open tripod filter holders. Avoid touching the inside of the filter holders. 

6. Fold immediately each filter piece four times and then fold again by rolling the filter like a 
cigarette paper. 

7. Carefully place the filters into 5 ml cryotubes and gently push the filters to minimize the space 
they occupy in the tube. Do not crumble the filter, just try to gently fold it once more while in the 
tube. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 17 



 

8. Add 4.5 ml of DNA/RNA Shield by using a pipette and make sure the filter is covered by the 
solution  

9. Label the tube appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

10. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

11. Transfer tubes into liquid N2 for flash freezing and subsequently store at -80oC. 

Water Column Standard Operating Procedures 2 ‒ WaSOP 2 (optional) 

Summary 

This protocol aims at collecting plankton organisms sized >20 μm. EMO BON observatories have 
different characteristics and may already follow specific routines for sampling plankton >20 μm. 
Therefore, observatories will be allowed to deviate from the WaSOP 2 as long the procedures 
followed are described in detail and adhere to the data as metadata. 

Here we suggest vertical tows by a 20 µm mesh size plankton net from 100 m depth to the surface 
of the water column or from bottom to the water column surface in case of a shallower site. The 
material collected in the cod end should be diluted and separated into 4 subsamples. Each 
subsample should be filtered through 10 µm polycarbonate membrane filters (47 mm in diameter) 
under vacuum pressure. After filtration, membranes should be left to dry, carefully folded, placed in 
individual tubes, preserved in DNA/RNA Shield, and stored in liquid nitrogen or at -80oC until further 
analyses. 

Filtration may initiate in the field immediately after sampling or after the transportation of sampled 
seawater to the laboratory. Samples should remain in a cool dark place during transportation and 
until filtration. It is important to be consistent to when the filtration takes place among the different 
sampling events, therefore observatories are expected to either always filter at the field or always 
transport water and filter it in the lab. 

Observatories may deviate from the protocol and opt for horizontal instead of vertical tow, or by 
introducing prefiltration at different mesh sizes. Nevertheless, it is important that all procedures are 
documented in detail and kept consistent during EMOBON. For a diagram representation of the 
procedures see Appendix 2. 

Protocol 

A. Materials, equipment, and supplies 

Before starting, ensure all materials equipment, and supplies are available by checking the following 
table (Table 3). 

 

 

 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 18 



 

Table 3: List of materials, equipment, and supplies for WaSOP 2. 

10% HCl 

70% ethanol 

Distilled water 

0.2 μm prefiltered seawater 

Purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) 

Gloves 

50 ml screw cap tubes 

Aluminium foil 

Wash bottles 

Forceps 

Vacuum pump 

Filtration system (47 mm in diameter) 1 and appropriate filter units 

Appropriate tubes (adjustable to the vacuum pump and the filtration system) 

Polycarbonate hydrophilic membranes, 10 μm pore size, 47 mm in diameter (see Appendix 1) 

20 μm plankton net 

2 ml cryotubes 

Permanent marker 

Transparent tape 

2000 μm mesh 

Nalgene-type bottle of 1 l (sample container) 

250 ml graduated containers 

Funnel 

DNA/RNA Shield 

Pipette (500-1000 μl) and suitable tips 

Access to liquid N2 

Access to -80oC 

1 The filtration system may differ from a filtration ramp to Duran-type pressure resistant glass 
bottles. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 19 



 

B. Preparation and Cleaning 

• Always wear gloves 

• Prepare 10% HCl. 

• Disinfect the workspace using 10% HCl. 

• Filter seawater at 0.2 μm to prepare 0.2-prefiltered seawater. Ideally this should be seawater 
from the sampling site. 

• Prepare a wash bottle filled with 0.2-prefiltered seawater. 

• Prepare a 50 ml screw cap tube filled with 10% HCl and a 50 ml screw cap tube filled with 0.2-
prefiltered seawater. Soak forceps and scalpel in the HCl tube and then in the 0.2-prefiltered 
seawater tube before every use. Store forceps in the 10% HCl tube after use. 

• Clean the filtration system: 

− Clean the filtration ramp or the Duran-type pressure resistant glass bottles with tap water 
and distilled water. 

− Dissasemble the filtration units and rinse with tap water, distilled water, and EtOH 70%. Allow 
them to dry before reassembling. 

Cleaning of the filtration system may also take place at the end of every sampling event. Make 
sure it was cleaned and stored properly before using it. 

• Rinse the 20 μm plankton net vigorously inside and outside using tap water and make sure 
material from previous samplings is washed away. Cleaning of the plankton net may also take 
place at the end of every sampling event. Make sure it was cleaned and stored properly before 
using it. 

• Clean the sample containers (Nalgene-type bottles of 1 l) using 250 ml of  10% HCl and incubate 
overnight. The following day wash twice using distilled water and twice using purified water (Milli-
Q or Nanopure). Rinse vigorously to ensure all interior surfaces are cleaned and acid is washed 
away. Cleaning and decontamination of the sample containers may also take place at the and 
of every sampling event. Make sure the containers were cleaned and stored properly before 
using them. 

• Rinse funnels vigorously with tap water and purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure). Cleaning and 
decontamination of funnels may also take place at the and of every sampling event. Make sure 
that materials were cleaned and stored properly before using them. 

• Coordinate the appropriate adjustment of the plankton net to the winch cable and the proper 
towing with the RV sailing personel. 

C. Setting up 

Set up the filtration system as described below. Filtration may take place in parallel depending on 
the available equipment. The filtration system used may differ from a filtration ramp to Duran-type 
pressure resistant glass bottles. Filtration units of 47 mm in diameter are adjusted on the ramp or 
on the bottles. Figure 6 depicts a filtration ramp and the 4 adjusted filtration units. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 20 



 

1. Open the 47 mm filtration unit(s). 

2. Humidify the filter holder area using 0.2-
prefiltered seawater. 

3. Soak forceps in the HCl tube and then in the 0.2-
prefiltered seawater tube before every use. 
Handle the filter with the forceps not by hand. 

4. Place a PC filter membrane (10 µm pore size; 47 
mm diameter) on the filtration unit. If more than 
one filtration units are available, for parallel 
filtration place a filter on each of the filtration 
units. Each PC filter is separated by 2 blue inter-
filters in the filter boxes. Make sure to remove the 
blue inter-filters or the water will not go through. 
Filters are non-polarized and both sides can be 
used. 

5. Close the filtration units and cover them using a 
glove or aluminium foil to avoid contaminations 

 
from air particles. 

Figure 6: Set up of the WaSOP 2 and WaSOP 3 

6. Connect the system to a vacuum pump using filtration equipment (filtration ramp and 47 mm 
filtration units) on the laboratory bench. The 

appropriate tubing system. filtration system is connected to a vacuum pump 
and filtration takes place in parallel in the 4 filtration 

7. If a filtration ramp is used, place the water outlet units. 
tube in a waste container or in the sink. 

D. Sample Collection 

1. Perform a vertical tow from 100 m depth to the surface using a 20 µm plankton net. If the total 
water depth is less than 100 m, plankton net may be towed from the bottom to the surface of 
the water column (Figure 7). 

2. Towing should be at a speed of ca. 0.5 m/s. 

3. Once the plankton net is back on deck, rinse the net from the outside with seawater to 
concentrate collected plankton in the cod-end. 

4. If the net is equipped with a flowmeter, record the sampled water volume. 

5. Adjust a 2000 μm mesh on a funnel and place it on the Nalgene-type bottle mouth. 

6. Transfer the plankton gently from the cod-end into a clean 1 l Nalgene-type bottle through the 
2000 μm mesh. To ensure all material is collected, rinse vigorously using a wash bottles of 0.2 
μm filtered seawater. Make sure the cod-end is rinsed well, especially the apertures on the sides 
(if any). 

7. Gently fill the Nalgene-type bottle up to 1 l with 0.2-prefiltered seawater. 

8. Mix the Nalgene-type bottle gently by rotating at least 5 times. 

9. Separate the 1 l of seawater into 4 subsamples of 250 ml in separate graduated containers.  

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 21 



 

10. Filtration should initiate as soon as possible after sampling. Subsamples may be transported to 
the laboratory if filtration at the field is not possible. Keep each of the subsample containers in 
a dark and cool place until filtration. 

E. Filtration and Sample Storage 

1. Filter subsamples through 10 μm pore size PC filter membranes (47 mm in diameter). 

2. Process each subsample in multiple filtration steps by adding 50 ml to the filtration tower in each 
step. This is because samples may be rich in plankton and clog the filter. Mix the Nalgene-type 
bottle gently for each of the 50 ml filtration steps. In case the filter clogs, stop the filtration and 
record the total volume filtered. 

3. After filtration, allow filters to dry. Recover each membrane using forceps and fold membranes 
three times. Soak forceps in the HCl tube and then in the 0.2-prefiltered seawater tube before 
every use. 

4. Place filter membrane into 2 ml cryotube. 

5. Add 1.5 ml of DNA/RNA Shield by using a pipette and make sure the filter is covered by the 
solution. 

6. Label the tube appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

7. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

8. Transfer tubes into liquid N2 for flash freezing and subsequently store into -80oC. 

9. Repeat steps 1-8 for all 4 replicated subsamples. Vacuum filtrations of the replicates may also 
take place in parallel if appropriate filtration system is available.  

10. For the third and fourth filter (replicates 3 and 4) skip step 5. Replicates 3 and 4 will be stored 
for biobanking and DNA/RNA Shield will not be used. 

F. Negative Controls 

As samples undergo different procedures at the operating stations and at the centralized sequencing 
centre laboratories, it is important to check for contaminations. For this reason, blank samples will 
be collected and processed together with the actual samples to serve as negative controls. The 
collection of the blank samples will take place after the seawater filtrations to account for the cleaning 
of the filtration apparatuses between different samples. After the seawater filtration follow the steps 
bellow to collect and store the negative control sample. 

1. Filter 250 ml of purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) through a 10 μm pore size PC filter 
membrane (47 mm in diameter). Follow filtration procedure as described above. 

2. After filtration, allow filter to dry. Recover the filter membrane using clean forceps and fold three 
times. Soak forceps in the HCl tube and then in the 0.2-prefiltered seawater tube before every 
use.  

3. Place membrane into a 2 ml cryotube. 

4. Add 1.5 ml of DNA/RNA Shield by using a pipette and make sure the filter is covered by the 
solution. 

5. Label the tube appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 22 



 

6. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

7. Transfer tubes into liquid N2 for flash freezing and subsequently store into -80oC. 

 

Figure 7: Vertical tow onboard a RV. 
The WP2 net is clean and about to be 
towed. 

Water Column Standard Operating Procedures 3 ‒ WaSOP 3 (optional) 

Summary 

This protocol aims at collecting plankton organisms sized >200 μm using WP2 plankton nets. EMO 
BON observatories have different characteristics and may already follow specific routines for 
sampling plankton >200 μm. Therefore, observatories will be allowed to deviate from the WaSOP 3 
as long the procedures followed are described in detail and adhere to the data as metadata. 

Here we suggest vertical tows by a 200 µm mesh WP2 plankton net from 100 m depth to the surface 
or from bottom to the water column surface in case of a shallower site. The material collected in the 
cod end should be diluted and separated into 4 subsamples. Each subsample should be filtered 
through 10 µm polycarbonate membrane filters (47 mm in diameter) under vacuum pressure. After 
filtration, membranes should be left to dry, carefully folded, placed in individual tubes, preserved in 
DNA/RNA Shield, and stored in liquid nitrogen or at -80oC until further analyses. 

Filtration may initiate in the field immediately after sampling or following transportation of sampled 
seawater to the laboratory. Samples should remain in a cool dark place during transportation and 
until filtration. It is important to be consistent to when the filtration takes place among the different 
sampling events, therefore observatories are expected to either always filter at the field or always 
transport water and filter in the lab. 

Observatories may deviate from the protocol and opt for horizontal instead of vertical tow, or by 
introducing prefiltration at different mesh sizes. Nevertheless, it is important that all procedures are 
documented in detail and kept consistent during EMOBON. For a diagram representation of the 
procedures see Appendix 2. 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 23 



 

Protocol 

A. Materials, equipment, and supplies 

Before starting, ensure all materials equipment, and supplies are available by checking the following 
table (Table 4). 

Table 4: List of materials, equipment, and supplies for WaSOP 3. 

10% HCl 

70% ethanol 

Distilled water 

0.2 μm prefiltered seawater 

Purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) 

Gloves 

50 ml screw cap tubes 

Aluminium foil 

Wash bottles 

Forceps 

Vacuum pump 

Filtration system (47 mm in diameter) and appropriate filter units 1 

Appropriate tubes (adjustable to the vacuum pump and the filtration system) 

Polycarbonate hydrophilic membranes, 10 μm pore size, 47 mm in diameter (see Appendix 1) 

200 μm WP2 plankton net 

2 ml cryotubes 

Permanent marker 

Transparent tape 

Nalgene-type bottle of 1 l (sample container) 

250 ml graduated containers 

Funnel 

DNA/RNA Shield 

Pipette (500-1000 μl) and suitable tips 

Access to liquid N2 

Access to -80oC 

1 The filtration system may differ from a filtration ramp to Duran-type pressure resistant glass 
bottles. 

 

 

 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 24 



 

B. Preparation and Cleaning 

• Always wear gloves 

• Prepare 10% HCl. 

• Disinfect the workspace using 10% HCl. 

• Filter seawater at 0.2 μm to prepare 0.2-prefiltered seawater. Ideally this should be seawater 
from the sampling site. 

• Prepare a wash bottle filled with 0.2-prefiltered seawater. 

• Prepare a 50 ml screw cap tube filled with 10% HCl and a 50 ml screw cap tube filled with 0.2-
prefiltered seawater. Soak forceps and scalpel in the HCl tube and then in the 0.2-prefiltered 
seawater tube before every use. Store forceps in the 10% HCl tube after use. 

• Clean the filtration system: 

− Clean the filtration ramp or the Duran-type pressure resistant glass bottles with tap water 
and distilled water. 

− Dissasemble the filtration units and rinse with tap water, distilled water, and EtOH 70%. Allow 
them to dry before reassembling. 

Cleaning of the filtration system may also take place at the end of every sampling event. Make 
sure it was cleaned and stored properly before using it. 

• Rinse the 200 μm WP2 plankton net vigorously inside and outside using tap water and make 
sure material from previous samplings is washed away. Cleaning of the plankton net may also 
take place at the end of every sampling event. Make sure it was cleaned and stored properly 
before using it. 

• Clean the sample containers (Nalgene-type bottles of 1 l) using 250 ml of  10% HCl and incubate 
overnight. The following day wash twice using distilled water and twice using purified water (Milli-
Q or Nanopure). Rinse vigorously to ensure all interior surfaces are cleaned and acid is washed 
away. Cleaning and decontamination of the sample containers may also take place at the and 
of every sampling event. Make sure the containers were cleaned and stored properly before 
using them. 

• Rinse funnels vigorously with tap water and purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure). Cleaning and 
decontamination of funnels may also take place at the and of every sampling event. Make sure 
that materials were cleaned and stored properly before using them. 

• Coordinate the appropriate adjustment of the plankton net to the winch cable and the proper 
towing with the RV sailing personel. 

C. Setting up 

Set up the filtration system as described below. Filtration may take place in parallel depending on 
the available equipment. The filtration system used may differ from a filtration ramp to Duran-type 
pressure resistant glass bottles. Filtration units of 47 mm in diameter are adjusted on the ramp or 
on the bottles. Figure 6 depicts a filtration ramp and the 4 adjusted filtration units. 

1. Open the 47 mm filtration unit(s). 

2. Humidify the filter holder area using 0.2-prefiltered seawater. 

3. Soak forceps in the HCl tube and then in the 0.2-prefiltered seawater tube before every use. 
Handle the filter with the forceps not by hand. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 25 



 

4. Place a PC filter membrane (10 µm pore size; 47 mm diameter) on the filtration unit. If more 
than one filtration units are available, for parallel filtration place a filter on each of the filtration 
units. Each PC filter is separated by 2 blue inter-filters in the filter boxes. Make sure to remove 
the blue inter-filters or the water will not go through. Filters are non-polarized and both sides 
can be used. 

5. Close the filtration units and cover them using a glove or aluminium foil to avoid contaminations 
from air particles. 

6. Connect the system to a vacuum pump using appropriate tubing system. 

7. If a filtration ramp is used, place the water outlet tube in a waste container or in the sink. 

D. Sample Collection 

1. Perform a vertical tow from 100 m depth to surface using a WP2 200 µm plankton net. If the 
total water depth is less than 100 m, plankton net may be towed from the bottom to the surface 
of the water column (Figure 7). 

2. Towing should be at a speed of ca. 0.5 m/s. 

3. Once the plankton net is back on deck, rinse the net from the outside with seawater to 
concentrate collected plankton to the cod-end. 

4. If the net is equipped with a flowmeter, record the sampled water volume. 

5. Transfer the plankton gently from the cod-end into a clean 1 l Nalgene-type bottle through the 
2000 μm mesh. To ensure all material is collected, rinse vigorously using a wash bottles of 0.2 
μm filtered seawater. Make sure the cod-end is rinsed well, especially the apertures on the sides 
(if any). 

6. Gently fill the Nalgene-type bottle up to 1 l with 0.2-prefiltered seawater. 

7. Mix the Nalgene-type bottle gently by rotating at least 5 times. 

8. Separate the 1 l of seawater into 4 subsamples of 250 ml in separate graduated containers.  

9. Filtration should initiate as soon as possible after sampling. Subsamples may be transported to 
the laboratory if filtration at the field is not possible. Keep each of the subsample containers in 
a dark and cool place until filtration. 

E. Filtration and Sample Storage 

1. Filter subsamples through 10 μm pore size PC filter membranes (47 mm in diameter). Filtration 
should proceed fast. 

2. After filtration, allow filters to dry. Recover each membrane using forceps and fold membranes 
three times. Soak forceps in the HCl tube and then in the 0.2-prefiltered seawater tube before 
every use. 

3. Place membranes into 2 ml cryotubes. 

4. Add 1.5 ml of DNA/RNA Shield by using a pipette and make sure the filter is covered by the 
solution. 

5. Label the tube appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 26 



 

6. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

7. Transfer tubes into liquid N2 for flash freezing and subsequently store into -80oC. 

8. Repeat steps 1-7 for all 4 replicated subsamples. Vacuum filtrations of the replicates may also 
take place in parallel if appropriate filtration system is available.  

9. For the third and fourth filter (replicates 3 and 4) skip step 5. Replicates 3 and 4 will be stored 
for biobanking and DNA/RNA Shield will not be used. 

F. Negative Controls 

As samples undergo different procedures at the operating stations and at the centralized sequencing 
centre laboratories, it is important to check for contaminations. For this reason, blank samples will 
be collected and processed together with the actual samples to serve as negative controls. The 
collection of the blank samples will take place after the seawater filtrations to account for the cleaning 
of the filtration apparatuses between different samples. After the seawater filtration follow the steps 
bellow to collect and store the negative control sample. 

1. Filter 250 ml of purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) through a 10 μm pore size PC filter 
membrane (47 mm in diameter). Follow filtration procedure as described above. 

2. After filtration, allow filter to dry. Recover the filter membrane using clean forceps and fold three 
times. Soak forceps in the HCl tube and then in the 0.2-prefiltered seawater tube before every 
use.  

3. Place membrane into a 2 ml cryotube. 

4. Add 1.5 ml of DNA/RNA Shield by using a pipette and make sure the filter is covered by the 
solution. 

5. Label the tube appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

6. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

7. Transfer tubes into liquid N2 for flash freezing and subsequently store into -80oC. 

  

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 27 



 

Soft Substrate 

Soft Substrate Standard Operating Procedures 1 ‒ SoSOP 1 (intertidal 
sediments) 

Summary 

Operating stations that have access to intertidal sediments are encouraged to choose such habitats 
as soft substrate sampling sites. Intertidal soft substrates will be sampled during low tides using 
sediment corers to ensure the collection of undisturbed sediment. Sediment corers are 
recommended to be at least 10 cm in diameter so that adequate sediment is collected. The top 5 
cm of sediment will be sliced and sampled for the collection of microorganisms and meiobenthos. 
For the collection of macrobenthos, all the sediment in the corers will be used. For each community 
sampled, 4 replicated samples should be collected. These replicates are designed to represent 
technical replicates and will be used for different purposes (more information on the Replication and 
BiobankingReplication and BiobankingReplication and BiobankingReplication and Biobanking 
section). 

The finer the sampled sediment is, the more care should be given during handling. For example, 
silty sediment might leak when the corer is retrieved from the sediment. In that case, corers handling 
should be performed quickly. In case operating stations find it impossible to use sediment corers in 
their site of choice, it will also be acceptable to use other means for sediment collection. For 
example, a shovel might be used to dig out sediment from a defined area, or metal frames could 
define the area from where the sediment will be collected. However, all deviations from the present 
protocols should be explicitly described and follow the samples as metadata. 

Sediment slicing or sieving may initiate in the field immediately after sampling or following the 
transportation of the sediment corers to the laboratory. Sediment corers should remain cool and in 
the dark during transportation and always be kept in a vertical position as retrieved from the field. It 
is important to be consistent to when the slicing or sieving takes place among the different sampling 
events, therefore observatories are expected to either always process samples in the field or always 
transport corers and process in the lab. 

Before shipment for DNA extraction and sequencing, the meiobenthic organisms should be 
extracted from the sediment. After the meiobenthos extraction, the meiobenthic organisms will be 
resuspended in the preservative DNA/RNA shield for shipment. 

Sediment collected for macrobenthos sampling will have to be sieved through a 1 mm sieve. Some 
marine areas, such as the Eastern Mediterranean, or polluted sediments are characterized by 
smaller macrobenthic organisms. Using a 1 mm sieve alone would result to missing a large part of 
the macrobenthos for those areas. In such cases, sequential sieving using both 1 mm and 0.5 mm 
sieves should take place. The organisms retained in the 1 mm and in the 0.5 mm sieves will be 
handled and stored separately as different fractions. After sieving all organisms will be crushed and 
homogenized using mortar and pestle to obtain a mixture of tissues. For a diagram representation 
of the procedures see Appendix 2. 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 28 



 

Protocol 

A. Materials, equipment, and supplies 

Before starting, ensure all materials equipment, and supplies are available by checking the following 
table (Table 5). 

Table 5: List of materials, equipment, and supplies for SoSOP 1 (intertidal sediments). 

Bleach solution 

Distilled water 

Purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) 

Gloves 

Aluminium foil 

Plexiglass or PVC sediment corers of at least 10 cm in diameter (microbial and meiobenthos 
community) 1 

Appropriate rubber stoppers for the 10 cm sediment corers (microbial and meiobenthos 
community) 

Plexiglass or PVC sediment corers of at least 20 cm in diameter (macrobenthos community) 1 

Appropriate rubber stoppers for the 20 cm sediment corers (macrobenthos community) 

Spatula and/or spoon 

Plunger 

Clean surface for mixing the sediment (e.g., large Petri dish or plastic bowl) 

Pipette (1000-5000 μl) and pre-cut 5000 μl tips (optional for silty sediments) 

1 mm sieve (macrobenthos community) 

0.5 mm sieve (optional; macrobenthos community) 

Mortar and pestle (macrobenthos community) 

15 ml screw cap tubes resistant to liquid N2 (microbial community) 

Ziplock bags (meiobenthos community) 

50 ml screw cap tubes (macrobenthos community) 

Permanent marker 

Transparent tape 

Laboratory balance 

DNA/RNA Shield (microbial and meiobenthos community) 

DESS aqueous solution (macrobenthos community) 

Pipette (500-1000 μl) and suitable tips 

Cotton swabs 

Access to liquid N2 (microbial community) 

Access to -80oC (microbial community) 

Access to -20oC (meiobenthos community) 

Access to 4oC (macrobenthos community) 

1 Alternatively, a multicorer may be used to collect several sediment corers simultaneously. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 29 



 

B. Preparation and Cleaning 

• Always wear gloves. 

• Prepare 10% bleach solution. 

• Prepare DESS aquaous solution (see DESS recipe). 

• Clean sediment corers and sieves using tap water. Rinse vigorously and make sure material 
from previous samplings is washed away. 

• Desinfect plastic material (large Petri dish and/or plastic bowl) by incubating in 10% bleach 
solution overnight. Rinse with purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) to wash the solution away and 
cover in aluminium foil to store. 

• Desinfect spatulas, spoons, and other metal tools by briefly soaking in 10% bleach solution. 
Rinse with purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) to wash the solution away and cover in aluminium 
foil to store. 

C. Negative Control Samples 

As samples undergo different procedures at the operating stations and at the centralized sequencing 
centre laboratories, it is important to check for contaminations. For this reason, blank samples will 
be collected and processed together with the sediment samples to serve as negative controls. Once 
the sediment is collected and before further processing, collect and store a negative control sample 
as described below: 

Microbial community negative control 

1. Use a cotton swab on the lab bench, the spatulas, and the spoons. 

2. Cut the cotton part of the swab and store it in a 15 ml screw cap tube. 

3. Add 10 ml of DNA/RNA Shield by using a pipette. 

4. Label the tube appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

5. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

6. Transfer tube into liquid N2 for flash freezing and subsequently store at -80oC. 

Meiobenthos community negative control 

1. Use a cotton swab on the lab bench, the spatulas, and the spoons. 

2. Cut the cotton part of the swab and store it in a Ziplock bag. 

3. Label the tube appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

4. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

5. Store the bag at -20oC. 

6. Process the negative control sample together with the sediment samples during the 
meiobenthos extraction from sediment. 

Macrobenthos community negative control 

1. Use a cotton swab on the spatulas, the spoons, the sieves and the mortar and pestle. 

2. Cut the cotton part of the swab and store it in a 50 ml screw cap tube. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 30 



 

3. Add 20 ml of DESS (see DESS recipe). 

4. Label the tube appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

5. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

6. Store at 4oC. 

D. Microbial Community Sampling 

1. Reach the sampling site during low tide. 

2. Deploy 2 plexiglass or PVC sediment corers of at least 10 cm in diameter. Deploy the different 
sediment corers in proximity and ensure that the sediment surface is not visually different among 
the deployment points. 

3. Use appropriate rubber stop to close the upper end of the corer while deployed in the sediment 
to create vacuum. 

4. Gently bring the corer to surface and place a rubber stop to its lower end. If sampling silt or clay 
sediment, retrieving corers from the sediment will need extra care as sediment may leak. In that 
case, the bottom end rubber stop should be placed quickly or, if possible, while the corer is still 
deployed in the sediment. In case, it seems difficult to adjust the lower stop, loosen the upper 
stop slightly, adjust the lower stop, and then firmly close the upper stop again. 

5. If available, a multicorer may be used to collect several sediment corers simultaneously (Figure 
8). In that case, all the necessary corers for microorganisms, meiobenthos and macrobenthos 
may be collected during the multicorer deployment. 

6. Ideally, the sediment core slicing should take place at the sampling site directly after collection. 
If this is not possible, corers should be kept in a cool and dark environment until transportation 
to the lab. Open the top rubber stop during transportation to prevent oxygen consumption which 
may alter the microbial community. In any case, handle sediment corers carefully and always 
keep them vertically (surface sediment on top) to avoid mixing surface to deep sediment (Figure 
9). 

7. Place a plunger in a sediment corer, push the corer to remove seawater and set the sediment 
at the surface of the corer. 

8. Push the corer to 6 cm and slice sediment at the top 5 cm and using a spoon and spatula place 
the slice on a clean surface (e.g., Petri dish or plastic bowl). 

9. Repeat steps 7-8 for both collected sediment corers and place the sediment slices on the same 
surface. 

10. Gently homogenize sediment using a spoon or a spatula.  

11. Pre-weigh a 15 ml screw cap tube and using a spoon and spatula transfer 10 g of sediment in 
the tube. An alternative, though less accurate, method would be to fill the 15 ml graduated screw 
cap tubes to approximately 10 ml tube indication. In the case of silty sediment, pre-cut 5000 μl 
tips might be used to transfer the sediment in the screw cap tubes by careful pipetting. Make 
sure that the 15 ml screw cap tubes used are resistant to liquid N2. 

12. Fill 4 screw cap tubes with the homogenized sediment. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 31 



 

10. Add 10 ml of DNA/RNA Shield by using a pipette and make sure the sediment is covered by the 
solution. For the third and fourth tube of replicate samples skip this step. Replicates 3 and 4 will 
be stored for biobanking and DNA/RNA Shield will not be used. 

13. Label the tube appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

14. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

E. Meiobenthos Community Sampling 

1. Reach the sampling site during low tide. 

2. Deploy 4 plexiglass or PVC sediment corers of at least 10 cm in diameter. Deploy the different 
sediment corers in proximity and ensure that the sediment surface is visually similar among the 
deployment points. 

3. Follow steps 3-10 above (Microbial Community Sampling), for deploying and retrieving the 
corers. 

4. Distribute the homogenised sediment into 4 plastic Ziplock bags and weigh the bags. Flatten 
the bags to allow stacking of samples. 

5. Label the Ziplock bags appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section) 
and apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

6. Store bags at -20oC. Sediment can be stored at -20oC safely for 2 years until meiobenthos 
extraction from sediment. 

F. Meiobenthos Extraction from Sediment 

Extract meiobenthos from the sampled sediment into purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) by density-
gradient centrifugation with the colloidal silica polymer Ludox HS-40 as a flotation medium, or 
equivalent (specific density 1.18 g cm−1). The meiobenthos extraction from sediment may take 
place any time after sampling and within 2 years. Before starting, ensure all materials equipment, 
and supplies are available by checking the following table (Table 6). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 32 



 

Table 6: List of materials, equipment, and supplies for meiobenthos extraction from 
sediment. 

Purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) 

Gloves 

50 ml centrifuge tubes 

Colloidal silica polymer Ludox HS-40 

32 µm sieve 

Funnel 

Spoon and/or spatula 

Wash bottle 

Centrifuge 

Isothermal box with ice 

Pipette (10 ml) and suitable tips 

Pipette (100-1000 μl) and suitable tips 

1.5 ml centrifuge tube 

Permanent fine-tip marker 

Transparent tape 

DNA/RNA Shield 

Access to -20oC 

1. Bring sediment Ziplock bags at room temperature. 

2. Remove sediment from Ziplock bag and transfer onto 32 µm sieve.  

3. Gently flush with water to thaw and reduce sediment volume.  

4. Using a funnel and a wash bottle containing the Ludox (or equivalent) transfer the sample from 
the sieve into the large centrifuge tube and homogenize using a spoon or spatula.  

5. Initiate first round of centrifugation (12 min, 1905 rcf, slow brake and acceleration). During 
centrifugation sediment will reside at the bottom of the large centrifuge tube while meiobenthos 
will move into the Ludox solution.  

6. Once centrifugation is completed, pour supernatant over 32 µm sieve; using a funnel and a 
wash bottle containing purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) transfer the sample into the 50 ml 
centrifuge tube trying to minimise the volume of water used. Retain this tube on ice in an 
isothermal box for the duration of the meiobenthos extraction.  

7. Re-fill the large centrifuge tube with Ludox and homogenize with a spoon or spatula.  

8. Repeat for two more centrifugation rounds.  

9. At the last round, pour the contents of the 50 ml centrifuge tube and that of the large centrifuge 
tube over the 32 µm sieve and subsequently transfer the entire sample back into the 50 ml 
centrifuge tube using a funnel and wash bottle containing purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure). 
This tube now contains the meiobenthos.  

10. Centrifuge this tube for 10 min at 1905 rcf (slow brake and acceleration), and carefully remove 
the supernatant using 10 ml pipette.  

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 33 



 

11. Resuspend the pellet containing the meiobenthos with 500 μl of DNA/RNA Shield and transfer 
the sample to a 1.5 ml centrifuge tube.  

12. For replicates 3 and 4 resuspend the pellet containing the meiobenthos with 500 μl of purified 
water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) and transfer the sample to a 1.5 ml centrifuge tube. Replicates 3 
and 4 will be stored for biobanking and DNA/RNA Shield will not be used. 

13. Label the tubes appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

14. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

15. Samples are now ready for DNA extraction. Store samples at -20oC until shipment. 

G. Macrobenthos Sampling 

1. Reach the sampling site during low tide. 

2. Deploy 5 plexiglass or PVC sediment corers of at least 20 cm in diameter. Alternatively, deploy 
10 plexiglass or PVC sediment corers of at least 10 cm in diameter. Deploy the different 
sediment corers in proximity and ensure that the sediment surface is not visually different among 
the deployment points. 

3. Follow steps 3-5 above (Microbial Community Sampling), for deploying and retrieving the 
corers. 

4. Place the total sediment in a 1 mm sieve and sieve it (see step 4 for sequential sieving). Make 
sure that the amount of remaining sediment in the sieve is minimized as much as possible. 

5. Optional: Perform sequential sieving. This is recommended for stations that usually use smaller 
sieve size for macrobenthos collection. Place a 1 mm sieve on top of a 0.5 mm sieve and sieve 
sediment sequentially through both sieves. This way the material that flows through the 1 mm 
sieve will be sequentially sieved through the 0.5 mm sieve. Make sure that the amount of 
remaining sediment in both sieves is minimized as much as possible. 

6. Transfer macrobenthic organisms retained in the sieve(s) in a mortar for homogenization. The 
remaining sediment that may be transferred with the organisms will be removed during the DNA 
extraction. Sediment homogenization may take place in the field directly after sieving. If this is 
not possible, macrobenthic organisms may be collected in tubes and kept in a cool and dark 
environment until transportation to the lab. 

7. Use mortar and pestle to crush and homogenize organisms until a tissue mixture is obtained. 

8. Transfer 10 g of the tissue mixture into a screw cup tube of 50 ml. Repeat this to obtain 4 screw 
cup tubes of 50 ml each containing 10 g of the tissue mixture. 

9. Fill tubes to 50 ml with DESS (see DESS recipe). 

10. Label the tubes appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

11. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

12. Store tubes at 4oC. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 34 



 

  

Figure 8: Multicorer deployment in an intertidal area. Figure 9: Example of corers that contain soft sediment 
and overlaying seawater. 

Soft substrate Standard Operating Procedures 2 ‒ SoSOP 2 (coastal 
sediments by diving) 

Summary 

If there is the capacity, operating stations may choose to sample coastal soft sediment by diving. 
This will lead to the collection of undisturbed sediment and would increase the precision of the 
sediment layers collected. Soft substrate sampling by diving will be performed using sediment corers 
as described above for the intertidal sediments [SoSOP 1 (intertidal sediments)]. 

Slicing and further handling of the sediment will take place upon retrieval of the sediment corers to 
the surface and transfer to a laboratory either onshore or onboard a research vessel. Sediment 
corers should remain cool and in the dark during transportation and always kept in a vertical position 
as retrieved from the field. During transportation, the corers should be open at the top to prevent 
oxygen consumption which may alter the microbial community composition. It is important to be 
consistent to when the slicing or sieving takes place among the different sampling events, therefore 
observatories are expected to either always process samples in the field or always transport corers 
and process in the laboratory. For a diagram representation of the procedures see Appendix 2. 

Protocol 

Upon divers reach the sampling site, follow the Standard Operating Procedures described in SoSOP 
1 (intertidal sediments). It is recommended to use plexiglass or PVC sediment corers of at least 10 
cm in diameter for the macrobenthos as they are easier handled by the diver. Sediment core slicing 
and sediment sieving should be carried out after diving either directly in the field or after 
transportation to the lab. For a diagram representation of the procedures see Appendix 2. 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 35 



 

Soft substrate Standard Operating Procedures 3 ‒ SoSOP 3 (coastal 
sediments by research vessel) 

Summary 

Observatories may choose to sample coastal soft substrate onboard a research vessel. Soft 
substrate will be collected using a van Veen or a Smith-McIntyre grab (0.07–0.1 m2) at the selected 
site. Sediment collection by grab is suitable for different types of sediment (clay to sandy sediments). 
The sediment should be brought onboard on a clean surface for subsampling. As the sediment 
collected in the grab is disturbed, subsampling should be performed carefully, and materials should 
not be immersed deep into the sediment to ensure the subsampling of surface sediment as much 
as possible. For each community sampled, 4 replicated samples should be collected. These 
replicates are designed to represent technical replicates and will be used for different purposes 
(more information on the Sample Labelling section). Sediment processing will take place onboard 
after collection. 

In case other sediment sampling equipment is available on the research vessels, as for example a 
multicorer, a box corer or a multi-box corer, the observatories may use this equipment to collect 
sediment from the field. Once the sediment is brought onboard, proceed with handling the sediment 
according to SoSOP 1 (intertidal sediments) if a multicorer was used, or proceed with sampling the 
top sediment as described below (SoSOP 3). 

Before shipment for DNA extraction and sequencing, the meiobenthic organisms should be 
extracted from the sediment. After the meiobenthos extraction, the meiobenthic organisms will be 
resuspended in the preservative DNA/RNA shield for shipment. 

Sediment collected for macrobenthos sampling will have to be sieved through a 1 mm sieve. Some 
marine areas, such as the Eastern Mediterranean, or polluted sediments are characterized by 
smaller macrobenthic organisms. Using a 1 mm sieve alone would result to missing a large part of 
the macrobenthos for those areas. In such cases, sequential sieving using both 1 mm and 0.5 mm 
sieves will take place. The organisms retained in the 1 mm and in the 0.5 mm sieves will be handled 
and stored separately as different fractions. After sieving all organisms will be crushed and 
homogenized using mortar and pestle to obtain a mixture of tissues. For a diagram representation 
of the procedures see Appendix 2. 

Protocol 

A. Materials, equipment, and supplies 

Before starting, ensure all materials equipment, and supplies are available by checking the following 
table (Table 7). 

 

 

 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 36 



 

Table 7: List of materials, equipment, and supplies for SoSOP 3 (research vessel). 

Bleach solution 

Distilled water 

Purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) 

Gloves 

Van Veen or Smith McIntyre grab (0.07–0.1 m2) 1 

10 ml cut-off syringes 

Spatula and/or spoon 

Clean surface for mixing the sediment (e.g., large Petri dish or plastic bowl) 

Pipette (1000-5000 μl) and pre-cut 5000 μl tips (optional for silty sediments) 

1 mm sieve (macrobenthos community) 

0.5 mm sieve (optional; macrobenthos community) 

Mortar and pestle (macrobenthos community) 

15 ml screw cap tubes resistant to liquid N2 (microbial community) 

Ziplock bags (meiobenthos community) 

50 ml screw cap tubes (macrobenthos community) 

Permanent marker 

Transparent tape 

Laboratory balance 

DNA/RNA Shield (microbial and meiobenthos community) 

DESS aqueous solution (macrobenthos community) 

Pipette (500-1000 μl) and suitable tips 

Cotton swabs 

Access to liquid N2 (microbial community) 

Access to -80oC (microbial community) 

Access to -20oC (meiobenthos community) 

Access to 4oC (macrobenthos community) 

1 Alternatively, a multicorer, a box corer or a multi-box corer may be used to collect sediment and 
bring it onboard. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 37 



 

B. Preparation and Cleaning 

• Always wear gloves when handling samples dedicated to microbial community analyses. 

• Prepare 10% bleach solution. 

• Prepare DESS aquaous solution (see DESS recipe). 

• Prepare 10 ml cut-off syringes for subsampling. Use a scalpel to cut off the luer lock end of the 
syringe so as the suringe is open at this end.  

• Clean sediment grab, shovel, bucket and sieves using tap water. Rinse vigorously and make 
sure material from previous samplings is washed away. 

• Desinfect plastic materials (cut-off syringes, large Petri dish and/or plastic bowl) by incubating in 
10% bleach solution overnight. Rinse with purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) to wash the 
solution away and cover in aluminium foil to store. 

• Desinfect spatulas, spoons, and other metal tools by briefly soaking in 10% bleach solution. 
Rinse with purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) to wash the solution away and cover in aluminium 
foil to store. 

C. Negative Control Samples 

As samples undergo different procedures at the operating stations and at the centralized sequencing 
centre laboratories, it is important to check for contaminations. For this reason, blank samples will 
be collected and processed together with the sediment samples to serve as negative controls. Once 
the sediment is collected and before further processing, collect and store a negative control sample 
as described below: 

Microbial community negative control 

1. Use a cotton swab on the lab bench, the spatulas, and the spoons. 

2. Cut the cotton part of the swab and store it in a 15 ml screw cap tube. 

3. Add 10 ml of DNA/RNA Shield by using a pipette. 

4. Label the tube appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

5. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

6. Transfer tube into liquid N2 for flash freezing and subsequently store at -80oC. 

Meiobenthos community negative control 

1. Use a cotton swab on the lab bench, the spatulas, and the spoons. 

2. Cut the cotton part of the swab and store it in a Ziplock bag. 

3. Label the tube appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

4. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

5. Store the bag at -20oC. 

6. Process the negative control sample together with the sediment samples during the 
meiobenthos extraction from sediment. 

Macrobenthos community negative control 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 38 



 

1. Use a cotton swab on the spatulas, the spoons, the sieves and the mortar and pestle. 

2. Cut the cotton part of the swab and store it in a 50 ml screw cap tube. 

3. Add 20 ml of DESS (see DESS recipe). 

4. Label the tube appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

5. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

6. Store at 4oC. 

D. Microbial Community Sampling 

1. Collect soft sediment using a van Veen or a Smith-McIntyre grab (0.07–0.1 m2) equipped on 
the research vessel (Figure 10). 

2. Bring sediment onboard on a clean surface for subsampling. In case a subsampling port is 
present at the top of the grab, perform subsampling from that port before the grab is opened. 

3. Use 10 ml cut-off syringes to subsample for the sediment microbial community. Collect about 
10 times a rather full 10 ml cut-off syringe from the same grab. 

4. Transfer the sediment collected in the syringes on a clean surface (e.g., Petri dish or plastic 
bowl) and homogenize gently using a spoon or a spatula. 

5. Pre-weigh a 15 ml screw cap tube and using a spoon and spatula transfer 10 g of sediment in 
the tube. An alternative, though less accurate, method would be to fill the 15 ml graduated screw 
cap tubes to approximately 10 ml tube indication. In the case of silty sediment, pre-cut 5000 μl 
tips might be used to transfer the sediment in the screw cap tubes by careful pipetting. Make 
sure that the 15 ml screw cap tubes used are resistant to liquid N2. 

6. In total, fill 4 screw cap tubes with the homogenized sediment. 

7. Add 10 ml of DNA/RNA Shield by using a pipette and make sure the sediment is covered by the 
solution. For the third and fourth tube of replicate samples skip this step. Replicates 3 and 4 will 
be stored for biobanking and DNA/RNA Shield will not be used. 

8. Label the tube appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

9. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

10. Add 5 ml of Purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) in a 15 ml screw cap tube. Briefly dip a clean 
spatula in the tube (clean and disinfected as described in the Preparation and Cleaning 

11.  section above). Add 10 ml of DNA/RNA Shield by using a pipette. This tube will be used as 
negative control sample. 

12. Label the tube appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

13. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

14. Transfer tubes into liquid N2 for flash freezing and subsequently store into -80oC. 

E. Meiobenthos Community Sampling 

1. Collect soft sediment using a van Veen or a Smith-McIntyre grab (0.07–0.1 m2) equipped at the 
research vessel (Figure 10).  

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 39 



 

2. Bring sediment onboard on a clean surface for subsampling. 

3. Use a shovel to transfer approximately half of the grabbed sediment in a clean bucket. 

4. Gently homogenize the sediment in the bucket by stirring it with a large spoon or spatula. 

5. Deploy a plexiglass or PVC sediment corer of 3.6 cm in diameter into the sediment.  

6. Transfer the sediment into a plastic Ziplock bag and weigh it. Flatten the bag before placing it 
into the freezer to allow stacking of samples. 

7. Repeat steps 5-6 to collect 4 subsamples in total. 

8. Label the Ziplock bags appropriately (see Sample Labelling section). 

9. Store the bags at -20oC. Sediment can be stored at -20oC safely for at least 2 years until 
meiobenthos extraction. 

F. Meiobenthos Extraction from Sediment 

Extract meiobenthos from the sampled sediment into purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) by density-
gradient centrifugation with the colloidal silica polymer Ludox HS-40 as a flotation medium, or 
equivalent (specific density 1.18 g cm−1). The meiobenthos extraction from sediment may take 
place any time after sampling and within 2 years. Before starting, ensure all materials equipment, 
and supplies are available by checking the following table (Table 8). 

Table 8: List of materials, equipment, and supplies for meiobenthos extraction from 
sediment. 

Purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) 

Gloves 

50 ml centrifuge tubes 

Colloidal silica polymer Ludox HS-40 

32 µm sieve 

Funnel 

Spoon and/or spatula 

Wash bottle 

Centrifuge 

Isothermal box and ice 

Pipette (10 ml) and suitable tips 

Pipette (100-1000 μl) and suitable tips 

1.5 ml centrifuge tube 

Permanent fine-tip marker 

Transparent tape 

DNA/RNA Shield 

Access to -20oC 

1. Bring sediment Ziplock bags at room temperature. 

2. Remove sediment from Ziplock bag and transfer onto 32 µm sieve.  

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 40 



 

3. Gently flush with water to thaw and reduce sediment volume.  

4. Using a funnel and a wash bottle containing the Ludox (or equivalent) transfer the sample from 
the sieve into the large centrifuge tube and homogenize using a spoon or spatula.  

5. Initiate first round of centrifugation (12 min, 1905 rcf, slow brake and acceleration). During 
centrifugation sediment will reside at the bottom of the large centrifuge tube while meiobenthos 
will move into the Ludox solution.  

6. Once centrifugation is completed, pour supernatant over 32 µm sieve; using a funnel and a 
wash bottle containing purified water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) transfer the sample into the 50 ml 
centrifuge tube trying to minimise the volume of water used. Retain this tube on ice in an 
isothermal box for the duration of the meiobenthos extraction.  

7. Re-fill the large centrifuge tube with Ludox and homogenize with a spoon or spatula.  

8. Repeat for two more centrifugation rounds.  

9. At the last round, pour the contents of the 50 ml centrifuge tube and that of the large centrifuge 
tube over the 32 µm sieve and subsequently transfer the entire sample back into the 50 ml 
centrifuge tube using a funnel and squeezing bottle containing purified water (Milli-Q or 
Nanopure). This tube now contains the meiobenthos.  

10. Centrifuge this tube for 10 min at 1905 rcf (slow brake and acceleration), and carefully remove 
the supernatant using 10 ml pipette.  

11. Resuspend the pellet containing the meiobenthos with 500 μl of DNA/RNA Shield and transfer 
the sample to a 1.5 ml centrifuge tube. 

12. For replicates 3 and 4 resuspend the pellet containing the meiobenthos with 500 μl of purified 
water (Milli-Q or Nanopure) and transfer the sample to a 1.5 ml centrifuge tube. Replicates 3 
and 4 will be stored for biobanking and DNA/RNA Shield will not be used. 

13. Label the tubes appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

14. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

15. Samples are now ready for DNA extraction. Store samples at -20oC until shipment. 

G. Macrobenthos Sampling 

1. Collect soft sediment using a van Veen or a Smith-McIntyre grab (0.07–0.1 m2) equipped at the 
research vessel (Figure 10).  

2. Bring sediment onboard and place it in a 1 mm sieve (see step 4 for sequential sieving). 

3. Sieve sediment. Make sure that the amount of remaining sediment in the sieve is minimized as 
much as possible. 

4. Optional: Perform sequential sieving. This is recommended for stations that usually use smaller 
sieve size for macrobenthos collection. Place a 1 mm sieve on top of a 0.5 mm sieve and sieve 
sediment sequentially through both sieves. This way the material that flows through the 1 mm 
sieve will be sequentially sieved through the 0.5 mm sieve. Make sure that the amount of 
remaining sediment in both sieves is minimized as much as possible. 

5. Transfer macrobenthic organisms retained in the sieve(s) in a mortar for homogenization. The 
remaining sediment that may be transferred with the organisms will be removed during the DNA 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 41 



 

extraction. Sediment homogenization may take place in the field site directly after sieving. If this 
is not possible, microbenthic organisms may be collected in tubes and kept in a cool and dark 
environment until transportation to the lab. 

6. Use mortar and pestle to crush and homogenize organisms until a tissue mixture is obtained. 

7. Transfer 10 g of the tissue mixture into a screw cup tube of 50 ml. Repeat this to obtain 4 screw 
cup tubes of 50 ml each containing 10 g of the tissue mixture. 

8. Fill tubes to 50 ml with DESS (see DESS recipe). 

9. Label the tubes appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

10. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

11. Store tubes at 4oC. 

 

Figure 10: Grab deployment from a 
RV. 

 

  

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 42 



 

Hard Substrate 

Hard Substrate Standard Operating Procedures ‒ HaSOP 

Summary 

The passive sampling of hard substrate communities will take place using ARMS units. More details 
on purchasing ARMS units, deployment and sample collection are available from the ARMS-MBON 
(http://www.arms-mbon.eu/).  

Different sampling strategies may be followed while setting up an ARMS observatory. Here are some 
strategies that have been implemented in past: 

1. Short-term surveys that aim at seasonal investigations and monitoring of alien species. ARMS 
are deployed for a period of 2-3 months usually during spring to summer season. 

2. Long-term surveys that aim at continuous biological monitoring and ecological research. ARMS 
are deployed for a period of 12 months and at the time of retrieval the next ARMS unit is 
deployed. 

3. Survey on community succession of macro-organisms. In this case 3 or more ARMS units are 
deployed on the same date and retrieved sequentially (i.e., 1 ARMS unit retrieved every 4 
months) to investigate the succession of settled organisms over time.  

Participating stations may opt for one of the sampling strategies or for a different sampling design 
depending on their scientific interests. However, if an observatory station has not performed ARMS 
deployment in the past, it is recommended to contact one of the current ARMS-MBON observatory 
stations to discuss possible sampling strategies. The sampling strategies usually reflect the internal 
research needs of the observatory stations. 

Deployment and retrieval of ARMS in EMO BON will follow the standards and protocols of the 
Smithsonian Institution (https://www.oceanarms.org/) and the additional guidelines of ARMS-MBON 
(http://www.arms-mbon.eu/). Selecting the location of the ARMS observatory is of great importance 
both for short-term and for long-term surveys. EMO BON recommends, if possible, that ARMS 
sampling sites are located near the water column and/or soft substrate sampling sites, as well as 
near long term monitoring sites. More information on the ARMS locations can be found in the ARMS-
MBON Handbook (http://www.arms-mbon.eu/). Deploying more than one ARMS unit, will give a 
better representation of the biodiversity in the area. It is recommended that three ARMS units per 
sampling site are deployed in close proximity. 

Sample processing after retrieval will follow the standards and protocols of the Smithsonian 
Institution (https://www.oceanarms.org/) and the additional guidelines of ARMS-MBON 
(http://www.arms-mbon.eu/); here only a brief description of the procedures may be found. After 
ARMS retrieval, units should be transferred in the laboratory where the disassembly and 
photography of ARMS plates will take place. Using scalpel and tweezers, sessile organisms are 
collected from each ARMS plate and placed in a collection tube. Motile fractions should be recovered 
from the ARMS bin using a 2 mm sieve on top of a 0.5 mm on top of a 0.1 mm. Seawater and 
sediment in the ARMS bin should gently pass sequentially through the three sieves (2 mm, 0.5 mm, 
and 0.1 mm) and the bin should be rinsed thoroughly to ensure the collection of all organisms. The 
material collected on the 0.5 mm sieve may be concentrated using a 40 μm nytex mesh. The material 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 43 



 

collected in the sieves should be photographed prior to storage. All sievings should be carefully 
performed to avoid overflow.  

In addition to the sessile fraction retrieved by plate scraping, each sieve will collect a different fraction 
of the motile organisms: a) motile fraction sieved with 2 mm (organisms >2 mm), b) motile fraction 
sieved with 0.5 mm (2 mm > organisms > 0.5 mm), and c) motile fraction sieved with 0.1 mm (0.5 
mm > organisms > 0.1 mm). The material in motile fraction a (organisms >2 mm) will be processed 
only for optical identification by photographing the individual specimens. The sessile together with 
the motile fractions b (2 mm > organisms > 0.5 mm) and c (0.5 mm > organisms > 0.1 mm) will be 
homogenized and processed for DNA extraction and sequencing.  

All tissues and material to be processed for sequencing (sessile fraction, b and c motile fractions) 
should be homogenized. The sessile fraction homogenization is a straightforward procedure 
performed using a blender. The motile fraction homogenization requires washing steps, and the 
grinding is performed using mortar and pestle. The procedures are described in detail by the 
Smithsonian Institution (https://www.oceanarms.org/). After thorough homogenization, the mixtures 
are stored in DESS at 4oC. 

At least 4 technical replicates should be collected from each sampling site, therefore material from 
the sessile fraction and the motile fractions should be stored in 4 individual tubes. In case the 
material is not enough to collect 4 technical replicates, collect as many as possible; make sure to 
indicate the number of collected replicates in the metadata. In many cases, biomass of a few species 
may dominate the community in ARMS. This may cause biases during DNA amplification and 
sequencing and to decrease this bias it is recommended to reduce the amount of biomass included 
during tissue homogenization (http://www.arms-mbon.eu/). 

Protocol 

All procedures regarding ARMS assembly, deployment, retrieval, disassembly, and sample 
processing are described in detail by the Smithsonian Institution (https://www.oceanarms.org/). 
Before starting, ensure all materials equipment, and supplies are available by checking the following 
table (Table 9). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 44 



 

Table 9: List of materials, equipment, and supplies for HaSOP. 

Bleach solution 

90% ethanol 

0.2-prefiltered seawater 

Gloves 

Elbow long gloves 

ARMS unit 

Crate to cover up the ARMS unit during retrieval 

Recovery bin for retrieving the AMRS unit 

Tie wraps of different sizes 

Buckets 

Wrenches 

Forceps 

Spatulas and/or spoons 

Scalpels 

Kimwipes 

Wash bottle with 0.2-prefiltered seawater 

Wash bottle with 90% ethanol 

2 mm sieve 

0.5 mm sieve 

0.1 mm sieve 

Mortar and pestle or Blender 

50 ml screw cap tubes 

Laboratory balance 

Permanent marker 

Pencil 

Transparent tape 

Parafilm 

DESS aqueous solution 

Access to -20oC 

Camera with housing and photo tray 

Sorting trays 

Plate tags 

15 ml screw cap tube 

Cotton swab 

Access to 4oC 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 45 



 

Negative control sample 

As samples undergo different procedures at the operating stations and at the centralized sequencing 
centre laboratories, it is important to check for contaminations. For this reason, blank samples will 
be collected and processed together with the ARMS samples to serve as negative controls. Once 
the ARMS unit is brought in the laboratory and before samples processing, collect and store a 
negative control sample as described below: 

1. Use a cotton swab on the lab bench, the spatulas, the spoons, and the sieves. 

2. Cut the cotton part of the swab and store it in a 15 ml screw cap tube. 

3. Add 10 ml of DESS. 

4. Label the tube appropriately using permanent marker (see Sample Labelling section). 

5. Apply transparent tape firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. 

6. Store at 4oC. 

  

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 46 



 

Sample Labelling 
Correct labelling is of extreme importance when collecting samples and especially for a network of 
more than ten operational stations running in the long-term. Proper labelling will ensure that samples 
collected are organized and processed appropriately, that data and metadata produced in EMO 
BON will be properly catalogued and analysed in the future, and that the data produced can be 
correctly assigned to the sampling sites. 

Participating institutions should decide on a name and a short ID for their observatory that will be 
maintained for the duration of EMO BON and will characterize all samples collected at this 
observatory. The name and ID of the observatory should be unique whether an observatory station 
samples for all three habitats (Wa: Water column, So: Soft substrate, Ha: Hard substrate) or for just 
one. For example, if “SMN99” is sampling water column 1 mile offshore and hard substrates in a 
marina, the observatory ID should be “SMN99” for both water column and hard substrate samplings. 
The different sampling sites of each observatory will be distinguished by the suffix “Wa” for water 
column, “So” for soft substrates and “Ha” for hard substrates. Therefore, if observatory “SMN99” is 
sampling all three habitats, it will include three different sites: “SMN99 Wa” (water column sampling 
site), “SMN99 So” (soft substrate sampling site) and “SMN99 Ha” (hard bottom sampling site). 

Five terms will constitute the label of each sample:  

1. Project (“EMO BON”) 

2. Sampling Site ID; that is the Observatory ID (for example “SMN99”) supplemented with the 
sampling site indicator (“Wa” for water column, “So” for soft substrates and “Ha” for hard 
substrates) 

3. Sampling Campaign Date formated as YYMMDD.For example “220315” would be the campaign 
on 15 March 2022. Especially for Hard substrates, both the deployment and retrieval dates have 
to be recorded formated as YYMMDD-YYMMDD. 

4. Size fraction (Wa: “3 μm” / “0.2 μm” / “20 μm” / “200 μm”) or organisms collected (So: “micro” for 
microorganisms, “meio” for meiobenthos and “macro” for macrobenthos) or ARMS fraction (Ha: 
“SF” for sessile fraction, “MF05” for motile fraction sieved through 0.5 mm, “MF01” for motile 
fraction sieved through 0.1 mm) 

5. Replicate (number 1-4). For labelling the negative control, this term will be replaced by the 
notation “blank” in parenthesis. 

A few examples of sample labelling may be found in Table 10. It is recommended to avoid hyphens, 
commas, underscores and to separate easily confused digits (for example 1 and 7, 0 and O). The 
combination of these terms will be unique for each individual sample within EMO BON. This unique 
Sample ID created from the combination of those terms will follow the sample and the generated 
data and metadata during all procedures and analyses.  

Permanent markers should be used for labelling the tubes and Ziplock bags and transparent tape 
should be applied firmly on top of the label to avoid bleaching. Samples that are not properly labelled 
will be discarded prior to DNA extraction. 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 47 



 

Table 10: Sample labeling examples 

Sample Description Sample ID 

EMO BON 
Replicate 1 from a water column sampling at the SMN99 Wa 
SMN99 observatory collected on 15 March 2022 on a 
3 μm filter 220315 

3 μm (1) 

EMO BON 

Replicate 3 from a soft substrate meiobenthos sample JIJO41 So 
at the JIJO41 observatory collected on 28 August 2021  210828 

meio (3) 

EMO BON 
Replicate 2 from a hard substrate sample at the 
RFF055 observatory that was collected from an ARMS RFF055 Ha 

unit deployed on 2 October 2022 and retrieved on 2 221002-221202 
December 2022, and sieved at 0.5 mm 

MF05 (2) 

EMO BON 
Negative control sample from a water column sampling JIJO41 Wa 
at the JIJO41 observatory collected on 15 March 2022 
on a 3 μm filter 220315 

3 μm (blank) 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 48 



 

Collection and Documentation of Metadata 
The collection of rich and detailed metadata is of great importance for the longstanding life cycle of 
the data collected in EMOBON. Metadata are necessary in all the principles of FAIR data 
management. To assure the correct data FAIRification, metadata should be considered even before 
the collection of the biodivarsity data. EMO BON will adhere to the FAIR data principles for all data 
generated within the network; therefore, the collection of metadata during sampling and laboratory 
procedure is essential and mandatory. More details on the data and metadata life cycle will be 
provided in the EMO BON Data Management Plan (DMP). EMO BON DMP will describe in detail 
the handling of the data and their processing towards FAIRification.  

Observatories will collect and document all information related to the data from sampling to 
sequencing and quality control. There will be 5 categories of metadata that will adhere to the data: 

1. Observatory Metadata 
Here, all information regarding the observatory station, the sampling sites, their characteristics, and 
the contact people will be included. This information will be provided with the registration form that 
will confirm participation to EMO BON (see also Participation to EMO BON 

 section and the Registration Form document). Observatory Metadata refer to the observatory and 
will not change among sampling events. Observatory Metadata will be digitalized and submitted as 
described in the DMP. 

2. Sampling Metadata 
All information related to each sampling event will be documented as Sampling Metadata. This will 
include date and time of sampling, sample handling details, deviation from protocols and other 
characteristics of the sampling events. These metadata will be recorded in log sheet provided by 
EMO BON during each sampling event and will be digitalized and submitted as described in the 
DMP. 

3. Measured Metadata 
Observatories will have to measure additional variables that will make the sequencing dataset 
relevant to its ecological context. Some variables are characterized as mandatory and are to be 
measured during every sampling event. Observatories may choose to additionally measure any of 
the recommended variables. The more environmental variables connect to the dataset, the more 
relevant and reusable the dataset will be. Information regarding the sampling and laboratory 
methodologies of the measured variables will be documented here. EMO BON will not give specific 
instructions for the methodologies of the environmental variables measured, as observatory stations 
are already equipped with specific instruments and follow specific procedures for their sampling 
sites. However, it is important that the same procedure is followed for each variable for all EMO 
BON samplings and the procedure is adequately described. Environmental variables are listed in 
Table 11 for each habitat (Water column, Soft substrate, Hard substrate). The DMP will describe all 
procedures to handle Measured Metadata after documentation. 

 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 49 



 

Table 11: List of Measured Metadata for EMO BON sampling. Different variables are listed for each of 
the three habitats. Mandatory Environmental Variables are to be measured and recorded for every 
sampling event. Observatories may choose to additionally measure any of the Recommended 
Environmental Variables. Star symbol (*) indicates which variables have been characterized as 
Essential Ocean Variables by The Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS). 

Habitat Mandatory Environmental Variables Recommended Environmental Variables 

Sea Surface Temperature * Dissolved Organic Carbon * 

Subsurface Temperature * (at the sampled Inorganic Carbon * 
depth) 

Sea Surface Salinity * Nutrients Concentration *: nitrate (NO -
3 ), 

nitrite (NO -
2 ), ammonium (NH +

4 ), phosphate 
(PO 3-

4 ) and silicic acid (Si(OH)4) 

Subsurface Salinity * (at the sampled Nitrous Oxide (N2O) Concentration * 
depth) 

Chlorophyll-a Concentration * Oxygen Concentration * 

 Particulate Matter * 

 pH 

Water Column 
 Bacterial Abundance and Biomass 

(Wa) 
(*emerging) 

 Other picoplankton Abundance and Biomass 
(*listed as phytoplankton by GOOS) 

 Nanoplankton Abundance and Biomass 
(*listed as phytoplankton by GOOS) 

 Microplankton Abundance and Biomass 
(*listed as phytoplankton by GOOS) 

 Mesoplankton Abundance and Biomass 
(*listed as zooplankton by GOOS) 

 Macroplankton Abundance and Biomass 
(*listed as zooplankton by GOOS) 

 Primary Productivity * 

Sediment temperature at the top 0-5 cm Sediment Granulometry (median grain size) 

Soft Substrates 
Sea Surface Temperature * Sediment Granulometry (percentage content 

(So) 
of each fraction of clay, silt, sand, gravel, 
cobbles, and boulders) 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 50 



 

Habitat Mandatory Environmental Variables Recommended Environmental Variables 

pH Porosity 

Redox potential (Eh) Wet Bulk Density 

 
Dry Weight 

 Oxygen Concentration 

 Sulphide Concentration (H2S) 
Soft Substrates 

(So) 
 Sulphate Concentration (SO 2-

4 ) 

 Organic Matter Content 

 Chlorophyll-a Concentration 

 Bacterial Abundance and Biomass 

 Phytobenthos Abundance and Biomass 

Sea Surface Temperature * Images of the specimens from the plates 

Subsurface Temperature * (at the sampled Images of the habitat and surrounding 
depth) environment 

Hard Substrates 
Sea Surface Salinity * Images of the sampling event 

(Ha) 

Subsurface Salinity * (at the sampled  
depth) 

Images of the ARMS plates  

4. Molecular Work Metadata 
This category will include information on all the procedures followed during the molecular work after 
the sample’s shipment. The sequencing centre will provide information on the DNA extraction, 
cleaning, sequence library preparation and sequencing. This information will be submitted as 
described in the DMP. 

5. Post-sequencing Metadata 
All information regarding the procedures performed on the raw sequences dataset to obtain a quality 
controlled processed dataset. Post-sequencing Metadata will be submitted as described in the DMP 
and will apply only to the processed dataset. 

EMO BON will provide e-log-sheets to document the metadata. The e-log-sheets will specify all the 
metadata that need to be collected and documented. All the described metadata will be mandatory 
with the only exception being the Recommended Environmental Variables of Measured Metadata. 
EMBRC will closely assist observatories during the metadata collection, documentation, and 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 51 



 

submission. Samples for which metadata are incomplete or improperly documented will be rejected 
from the observatory network. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 52 



 

DNA extraction 
DNA extraction will be performed at a centralized facility to minimize biases. It is important that all 
EMO BON samples are processed in the same laboratory, under the same conditions and using the 
same equipment to minimise operator bias in the study. As the laboratory analyses of samples will 
take place at different time intervals, it is essential that the procedures followed are as standardized 
as possible. DNA extraction will be performed using commercialized kits, as the standardized 
solutions of the kits will minimize extraction deviations among samples. 

For DNA extraction of the water column filter samples the NucleoSpin Plant II Mini kit (Macherey-
Nagel) will be used. This kit has been previously tested by EMBRC partners and was found to 
perform well for DNA extraction from filters. 

DNA extraction from sediment samples will be performed using the commercially available DNeasy 
PowerSoil Pro kit (Qiagen). This kit has been tested multiple times for sediment DNA extraction by 
EMBRC partners and has been found to result in high yields. During EMO BON preparation phase, 
the DNeasy PowerSoil Pro kit was tested for DNA extraction from meiobenthos samples (Soft 
Substrates) and results indicated that the kit performs well and can be used within EMO BON. The 
DNeasy PowerSoil Pro kit will also be used for DNA extraction from macrobenthos tissues (Soft 
Substrate) and the tissue mixtures from the Hard Substrates. This kit was used for DNA extraction 
from tissues during ARMS-MBON. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 53 



 

Sequencing 
Sequencing will also be performed at a centralized sequencing facility to reduce biases as much as 
possible. The Water Column WaSOP1 and the Soft sediment samples for microorganisms will be 
analysed using metagenomics. All other samples will be analysed using DNA metabarcoding 
methodologies. Samples and analyses details are summarized in Table 12. 

Table 12: Sequencing details for samples. 

Protocol Sample Analyses Details Primer references 

Microorganisms 
-150 bp fragments 

(3 μm fraction) 
-paired reads 

Metagenomes  
-50 M reads per 

Microorganisms 
sample 

(0.2 μm fraction) 
WaSOP 1 

Microorganisms 
(3 μm fraction) -ITS amplicon 

ITS1F (Bruns and Gardes, 1993) and 
Metabarcodes -paired reads 

-1 M reads per sample ITS2 (White et al., 1990) 
Microorganisms 
(0.2 μm fraction) per amplicon 

WaSOP 2 Plankton >20 μm -18S v4 region 
-COI amplicon -18S v4 region: to be decided 

Metabarcodes -paired reads -COI: mlCOIintF and jgHCO2198 
WaSOP 3 Plankton >200 μm -1 M reads per sample (Leray et al., 2013)  

per amplicon 

-150 bp fragments 
Microorganisms Metagenomes -paired reads  

-1 M reads per sample 

SoSOP 1 
Meiobenthos -18S v1-v2 region: SSU_FO4 

SoSOP 2 -18S v1-v2 region (Fonseca et al., 2010) and SSU_R22 
-COI amplicon 

SoSOP 3 (Blaxter et al., 1998) or SSU_R22mod 
Metabarcodes -paired reads (Sinniger et al., 2016) 

Macrobenthos -50 M reads per 
sample per amplicon -COI: mlCOIintF and jgHCO2198 

(Leray et al., 2013)  

Sessile fraction -18S v1-v2 region: SSU_FO4 
-18S v1-v2 region (Fonseca et al., 2010) and SSU_R22 

Motile 0.5 mm -COI amplicon (Blaxter et al., 1998) or SSU_R22mod 
HaSOP fraction Metabarcodes -paired reads (Sinniger et al., 2016) 

-1 M reads per sample 
Motile 0.1 mm per amplicon -COI: mlCOIintF and jgHCO2198 

fraction (Leray et al., 2013)  

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 54 



 

Replication and Biobanking 
The replicates collected within EMO BON are technical replicates, not true statistical replicates. They 
represent identical samples and are to be used for different purposes. All 4 replicates per sample 
are collected following the exact same procedures as described in the Sampling Protocols section. 

Two of the replicates will be processed for the extraction of DNA and subsequently sequencing. The 
replication of processed samples will allow the recognition of false or accidental laboratory practices 
and ensure the highest data quality. Additionally, 1 replicate per sample will be provided as a service 
from EMBRC to external users. The purpose of this service provision is to encourage the 
collaboration among marine institutions, to give the chance for biodiversity information comparisons 
across the globe and to allow samples to be analysed using different methodologies and under 
alternative foci. 

EMO BON aims to be part of global research effort in marine biodiversity and to interact with other 
scientific entities and disciplines. It will contribute to the UN Decade of the Ocean not only by 
producing accurate and complete time-series data on marine biodiversity but also by preserving 
material samples for re-analyses at the end of the decade or beyond. Particularly, one replicate will 
be collected and biobanked for decadal storage. Decadal samples will be stored at -80oC organized 
in containers dedicated only to decadal preservation. All marine operating stations are required to 
keep detailed records of the preserved samples. 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 55 



 

Calibration efforts 
The cross-validation of the generated data and the calibration of methods is of high importance for 
EMO BON. Data produced within EMO BON will be a contribution to the United Nations Decade of 
Ocean Science for Sustainable Development and to the marine science community. As data will 
follow FAIR principles, will be reusable and will help reply to different scientific questions over the 
years. Data may be analysed several times during the coming decade as different scientists may 
access them. Therefore, it is essential that the quality of the data produced is high and that there is 
the capacity to validate the sequencing results in various ways. 

For this reason, during all samplings two of the technical replicates collected will be processed. DNA 
extraction and sequencing of the replicates will take place under the same conditions and all followed 
procedures will be the same. Results of the two processed replicated will be integrated to produce 
final quality control datasets. In addition, a mock community comprised of eukaryotic 
microorganisms and a mock community comprised of bacteria will be created at EMBRC culture 
collections. The mock communities will be processed together with the samples and serve as 
positive controls. As the diversity of the mock communities will be known, the sequencing results 
will be validated by examining the sequencing reads of the mock communities 

During sampling blank samples will be collected to serve as negative controls during DNA extraction 
and sequencing. This will help detect contamination during sampling or laboratory processing. In 
case a contamination is detected, it will be possible to go back to the sampling and processing of 
samples and revise the procedures. Furthermore, the sequencing reads of the blank samples will 
allow for corrections during the final dataset refining. 

A sampling calibration exercise is planned to take place during EMO BON. The personnel 
responsible for sampling will be exchanged among observatories. Personnel will participate in a 
sampling event at one or more different observatories. The idea behind this is to standardize the 
methods between EMO BON operating stations and to exchange expertise. In combination to the 
training workshops planned, the sampling methods used in EMO BON will be harmonized among 
the different observatories. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 56 



 

References 
Antão, L. H., Pöyry, J., Leinonen, R., and Roslin, T. (2020). Contrasting latitudinal patterns in 

diversity and stability in a high-latitude species-rich moth community. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. 
29, 896–907. doi:10.1111/geb.13073. 

Blaxter, M. L., De Ley, P., Garey, J. R., Llu, L. X., Scheldeman, P., Vierstraete, A., et al. (1998). A 
molecular evolutionary framework for the phylum Nematoda. Nature 392, 71–75. 
doi:10.1038/32160. 

Bruns, T. D., and Gardes, M. (1993). Molecular tools for the identification of ectomycorrhizal fungi 
— taxon‐specific oligonucleotide probes for suilloid fungi. Mol. Ecol. 2, 233–242. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-294X.1993.tb00013.x. 

Claudet, J., Bopp, L., Cheung, W. W. L., Devillers, R., Escobar-Briones, E., Haugan, P., et al. 
(2020). A Roadmap for Using the UN Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development 
in Support of Science, Policy, and Action. One Earth 2, 34–42. 
doi:10.1016/j.oneear.2019.10.012. 

Fonseca, V. G., Carvalho, G. R., Sung, W., Johnson, H. F., Power, D. M., Neill, S. P., et al. (2010). 
Second-generation environmental sequencing unmasks marine metazoan biodiversity. Nat. 
Commun. 1, 1–8. doi:10.1038/ncomms1095. 

Heymans, J. J., Bundy, A., Christensen, V., Coll, M., de Mutsert, K., Fulton, E. A., et al. (2020). 
The Ocean Decade: A True Ecosystem Modeling Challenge. Front. Mar. Sci. 7, 766. 
doi:10.3389/fmars.2020.554573. 

Leray, M., Yang, J. Y., Meyer, C. P., Mills, S. C., Agudelo, N., Ranwez, V., et al. (2013). A new 
versatile primer set targeting a short fragment of the mitochondrial COI region for 
metabarcoding metazoan diversity: Application for characterizing coral reef fish gut contents. 
Front. Zool. 10, 1–14. doi:10.1186/1742-9994-10-34. 

Muller-Karger, F. E., Miloslavich, P., Bax, N. J., Simmons, S., Costello, M. J., Pinto, I. S., et al. 
(2018). Advancing marine biological observations and data requirements of the 
complementary Essential Ocean Variables (EOVs) and Essential Biodiversity Variables 
(EBVs) frameworks. Front. Mar. Sci. 5, 25. doi:10.3389/fmars.2018.00211. 

Obst, M., Exter, K., Allcock, A. L., Arvanitidis, C., Axberg, A., Bustamante, M., et al. (2020). A 
Marine Biodiversity Observation Network for Genetic Monitoring of Hard-Bottom Communities 
(ARMS-MBON). Front. Mar. Sci. 7, 572680. doi:10.3389/fmars.2020.572680. 

Seutin, G., White, B. N., and Boag, P. T. (1991). Preservation of avian blood and tissue samples 
for DNA analyses. Can. J. Zool. 69, 82–90. doi:10.1139/z91-013. 

Sinniger, F., Pawlowski, J., Harii, S., Gooday, A. J., Yamamoto, H., Chevaldonné, P., et al. (2016). 
Worldwide analysis of sedimentary DNA reveals major gaps in taxonomic knowledge of deep-
sea benthos. Front. Mar. Sci. 3, 92. doi:10.3389/fmars.2016.00092. 

Smale, D. A., Wernberg, T., Oliver, E. C. J., Thomsen, M., Harvey, B. P., Straub, S. C., et al. 
(2019). Marine heatwaves threaten global biodiversity and the provision of ecosystem 
services. Nat. Clim. Chang. 9, 306–312. doi:10.1038/s41558-019-0412-1. 

White, T. J., Bruns, T., Lee, S., and Taylor, J. (1990). “Amplification and direct sequencing of 
fungal ribosomal RNA genes for phylofenetics,” in PCR Protocols: A Guide to Methods and 
Applications, eds. M. A. Innis, D. H. Gelfland, J. J. Sninsky, and T. J. White (San Diego: 
Academic Press), 315–322. 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 57 



 

Appendix 1: Materials and equipment 
Specifications of filters and filter holders 

• Polycarbonate hydrophilic membranes, 0.2 μm pore size, 142 mm (WaSOP 1) 

− For example the following items may be used: 

MERCK - GTTP14250 

Sterlitech - PCT0214220 

• Polycarbonate hydrophilic membranes, 3 μm pore size, 142 mm (WaSOP 1) 

− For example the following items may be used: 

MERCK - TSTP14250 

Sterlitech - PCT3014220 

• Polycarbonate hydrophilic membranes, 10.0 pore size, 47mm (WaSOP 2 and 3) 

− For example the following items may be used: 

MERCK TCTP04700 

Sterlitech - PCT10047100 

• Stainless steel filter holder, 142 mm (WaSOP 1) 

− For example the following items may be used: 

MERCK - YY3014236 

Sterlitech - 301900 

Sterlitech - 302000 

Sterlitech - 302100 

Sterlitech - 302200 

DESS recipe 

The recommended composition of DESS aqueous solution is 20% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 0.25 
M ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), and saturated sodium chloride (NaCl) (Seutin et al., 
1991). The pH of the DESS solution should be adjusted to 8. 

Hydrochloric acid (HCl) 10% recipe 

Hydrochloric acid aquatic solution is usually found at 37% w/w concentration (density 1.2 g/mL at 
25°C and molecular weight 36.5 g/mol). That corresponds to 12 M. To prepare 1 l of 10% HCl, add 
270 ml of 37% HCl to 600 ml of distilled water. Stir gently to make sure the acid is evenly mixed. 
Add distilled water to the final volume of 1 l and stir again gently. It is important to add acid to water, 
never the opposite. Make sure to take all necessary precautions before working with acid (lab coat, 
fume hood, safety goggles). Read the specifications of the HCl aquatic solution before starting. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 58 



 

Bleach (sodium hypochlorite, NaClO) 10% recipe 

Sodium hypochlorite aquatic solution is usually found at 5-8.25% concentration. It is recommended 
that to use a solution of at least 0.5% for disinfection. To prepare 10% bleach solution dilute the 
stock solution at a ratio 1:10, that is add 1 part of bleach solution to 9 parts of distilled water. For 
example, to prepare 1 l of 10% bleach, add 100 ml of bleach into 900 ml of distilled water. Make 
sure to take all necessary precautions before working with bleach (lab coat, fume hood, safety 
goggles). Read the specifications of the bleach solution before starting. 

  

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 59 



 

Appendix 2: Samples Summary 

 

Figure 11: Diagram summarizing the WaSOP1 procedures, the samples collected, and the destination of the samples after 
collection. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 60 



 

 

Figure 12: Diagram summarizing the WaSOP2 procedures, and the samples collected. 

 

Figure 13: Diagram summarizing the WaSOP3 procedures, and the samples collected. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 61 



 

 

Figure 14: Diagram summarizing the SoSOP1 and SoSOP2 procedures, the samples collected, and the destination of the 
samples after collection. The dashed lines and boxes in the macrobenthos collection diagram indicate the sequential 
sieving performed optionally by the stations that usually use smaller sieve size for macrobenthos collection. 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 62 



 

 

Figure 15: Diagram summarizing the SoSOP3 procedures, the samples collected, and the destination of the samples after 
collection. The dashed lines and boxes in the macrobenthos collection diagram indicate the sequential sieving performed 
optionally by the stations that usually use smaller sieve size for macrobenthos collection. 

 

European Marine Omics Biodiversity Observation Network  
(EMO BON) 63