REef REsources Assessment Tools

uNDERwATER vISuAL FIsH
CEnSuS SuRvEyS

Proper use and implementation 

Pierre Labrosse, SPC Principal Reef Fisheries Scientist, Noumea
Michel Kulbicki, IRD Research Officer, Noumea

Jocelyne Ferraris, IRD Research Officer, Noumea

Secretariat of the Pacific Community 
Noumea, New Caledonia 

2002

This document has been produced with the financial assistance of the European Community and France.

The views expressed herein are those of SPC and can therefore in no way be taken to reflect the official opinion of 
the European Community and France.



© Copyright, Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC), 2002

Original text: French

Secretariat of the Pacific Community cataloguing-in-publication data

Labrosse, Pierre
Underwater visual fish census surveys: Proper use and implementation by
Pierre Labrosse, Michel Kulbicki and Jocelyne Ferraris

(REAT: Reef resources assessment tools)

I. Fish stock assessment - Oceania - Handbooks, manuals, etc
2. Diving--Handbooks, manuals, etc

I.Title  2. Secretariat of the Pacific Community 3. Series 4. Kulbicki, Michel 5.
Ferraris, Jocelyne

ISBN 982-203-878-X AACR2

Secretariat of the Pacific Community
BP D5

98848 Noumea Cedex
New Caledonia

Telephone: +687 26 20 00
Facsimile: +687 26 38 18

Email: spc@spc.int
http://www.spc.int

Prepared for publication and printed at the Secretariat of the Pacific Community
Noumea, New Caledonia

ii



TABLE OF CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .V

FOREWORD  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .VI

I - INTRODUCTION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
I.1 - Why assess resources?  Assessment and management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
I.2 - What kinds of assessment methods are available to fisheries 

management personnel?  Role of underwater visual census surveys . . . . .2

II - BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON UNDERWATER VISUAL FISH 
CENSUS SURVEYS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
II.1 - Basic principles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
II.2 - Which types of data for exactly what kind of information?  . . . . . . . . . . . . .6

II.2.1 - Status of fish stocks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
II.2.2 - Environmental factors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10

II.3 - Sources of error  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
II.3.1 - Sources of error due to the diver  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
II.3.2 - Sources of error due to fish  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
II.3.3 - Sources of error due to sampling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13

II.4 - How to limit sources of error  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
II.4.1 - Observer training  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
II.4.2 - Basic rules for designing sampling surveys and selecting transects

or stationary points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20

iii



III - SETTING UP VARIABLE DISTANCE UNDERWATER VISUAL FISH
CENSUS SURVEYS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26
III.1 - Review of safety rules for diving work  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26
III.2 - Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .28
III.3 - Transects  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .29
III.4 - Stationary points  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .33

IV - USING THE DATA COLLECTED  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .37
IV.1 - Entering and formatting data  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .37
IV.2 - Calculating densities, biomass and stock (numeric and weighted)  . . . . . .37
IV.3 - Calculating the accuracy of density and biomass estimates . . . . . . . . . . . .40
IV.4 - Mean composition of substrate and living organism cover  . . . . . . . . . . . .42
IV.5 - Initial analysis of results  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .42

IV.5.1 - Comparing results  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .42
IV.5.2 - Correlations between fish and environmental factors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .45

V - CONCLUSIONS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .47

APPENDICES  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .49
Appendix 1 - Outlines of the major fish families that are of food 

and/or commercial interest  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .49
Appendix 2 - List of fish species that are of food and/or commercial interest  . . . . .50
Appendix 3 - Fish census record sheet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .51
Appendix 4 - Environmental factors record sheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .52

TO FIND OUT MORE …  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .53

iv



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This handbook is the result of a team effort and so we would like to thank all those who

contributed to it.

The SPC Publications Section played a major role in this work. Our warm thanks to
Muriel Borderie who handled the lay out, Jipé Le Bars who designed its illustrations and
Kim Des Rochers who edited the manuscript.

We should not overlook the proof-readers, who made significant improvements to the
manuscript: Marie-Thérèse Bui, Ben Ponia and Sheryl Mellor and Gilles Kaboha who
translated the handbook into English.

Finally, we would like to express our special thanks to Mireille Harmelin-Vivien who gave
us permission to take our inspiration from a document about underwater visual census
surveys published in 1985 (see ‘To Find Out More…’ section).

This document is dedicated to Pierre Thollot.

v



FOREWORD

T his document is the first in a series of publications that respond to requests from fish-
ery services in Pacific Island countries and territories for tools and practical advice on

implementing reef fish resource assessment methods. This series is open to all authors and
is part of a process of standardising assessment and monitoring methods for reef and
lagoon fishery resources and activities at the regional level.

A variety of manuals and publications have dealt with underwater visual census survey
methods and their applications, as well as data processing and analysis. For this reason, this
handbook will simply review their major aspects. Its main purpose is to introduce an
underwater visual census survey method that has been developed and enhanced by the
French Institute of Research for Development (IRD). This method has been tested in a
number of different locations, including New Caledonia,Tonga and Fiji Islands. It can also be
adapted for and has applications in the assessment of invertebrate resources.This booklet
is a companion document to the ReACT-FishUVC software, which makes it possible to
both enter the data acquired during surveys using this method and carry out initial calcula-
tions on them.

vi



I - Introduction

I.1 – Why assess resources? most part, fragile due to their scarcity or
Assessment and management their biological and ecological characteristics.

Due to their high market value, reef fisheries

Asteady rise in many Pacific Island popu- are also prone to destructive practices (e.g.
lations, particularly those in urban areas cyanide or dynamite fishing), which endanger

and capitals, is causing an ever-increasing fishermen, coral reefs and their inhabitants.
demand for protein. Given the limited land
available to small islands and the developing Despite the risks inherent in such activities,
nature of most island economies, it is unlikely reef resources represent a source of nutri-
that this nutritional demand will be satisfied tion and income and a significant develop-
by either agriculture or imports in the near ment opportunity for Pacific Island countries.
future. Pressure on fisheries, especially These communities and their governments
nearshore reef fisheries, will inevitably must try to balance conflicting demands,
increase. development, and maintain ecological integri-

ty; however, available information and
In addition to local needs, there is a growing resources are still insufficient.
demand in Asia and other areas for speciality
reef fishery products, and Pacific Island Managing means looking ahead. Managing
exporters are finding new markets on a reg- also involves adapting existing resources to
ular basis. One such example is the market meet the objectives set for the medium- or
for live reef food and aquarium fish. As with long-term (i.e. beyond three years). Good
all fishing, exploitation has an effect on the management practices are based on having
reef ecosystem, but the potential risks from as much information as possible about the
this particular fishery are quite high.This context and environment the practices will
market demands species that are, for the be applied to. For that reason, data collection

1



methods that make it possible to describe as Acquiring this information involves:
closely as possible the situation at a given 1) designing sampling strategies that provide a
point in time, must be determined. Ideally, as reliable picture of the resource for an
part of the precautionary approach, acceptable level of effort both in terms of
management plans should be designed from cost and time; and
baseline information and include monitoring 2) implementing adequately tested methods
measures so that action can be taken to provide high quality information that can
whenever human-induced changes become be compared in both space and time,
noticeable. thereby allowing reliable measurement of

any changes that occur.
This information should include:

I.2 – What kinds of assessment
estimates of total and exploitable fishery methods are available to
stocks; fisheries management personnel?

Role of underwater visual
analysis of the main structures of these census surveys
populations (size, trophic and population
structures);

Many types of reef and lagoon resource
assessment methods exist. None of them

the health status of the reef and associat-
are perfect and all have advantages and dis-

ed ecosystems; and
advantages. They all have one point in
common: they are based on the study of a

a good grasp of the dynamics of the fishery.
section or subgroup of the population in
question. For that reason, they require the
use of sampling techniques, which can be

Such information should make it possible divided into three categories: capture
to adapt management measures to each methods, mixed methods and non-capture
new situation encountered. methods.

2



Capture methods mainly involve record- ture methods. In particular, they include
ing information on fish captured in traps capture-tag-recapture methods, which are
(and, more generally, with bait), in nets by difficult to assess qualitatively or quantita-
trawling, and with lines. These methods are tively. On the other hand, mixed methods
based on an analysis of the catch per unit are very effective in determining age,
of effort (CPUE), which is considered to be growth, movement and behaviour in reef
an index of the study population’s density. fish populations.
Capture methods can be used at any time
and at considerable depths. Moreover, they Due to hyperdiversity1 and the wide
can be implemented on a wide scale and at range of reef and lagoon environments,
low cost using scientifically unskilled staff. capture methods are often inadequate.
On the other hand, gear design and selec- The most effective capture method is
tivity, the effect of baits, and the capturability destructive and/or disruptive (e.g.
of certain species are all factors that have dynamite, rotenone), but can occasionally
an effect on the comprehensiveness and be useful for calibrating methods based
accuracy of these methods, which remain on observation. This justifies the
low to moderate. One exception, however, development of true non-capture or
is fishing with explosives or poisons (e.g. ‘fishery independent’ methods,
rotenone), which gives comprehensive which include visual censuses and
results, particularly in terms of species rich- hydroacoustic techniques.These two
ness, but whose destructive effects are a techniques are especially useful for
major disadvantage, particularly for repeat- assessing pelagic or semi-pelagic fish
ed sampling. stocks comprising a limited number of

species.They are, however, poorly adapted
‘Mixed’ methods are somewhere to highly diverse benthic populations,
between capture methods and non-cap- although certain applications are possible,

1 The term ‘hyperdiversity’ refers not only to very high species diversity, but also to very high diversity of biotopes, ecological niches,
behaviours, genomes and uses.

3



particularly for behavioural studies.The measure fish and invertebrate
clarity of tropical water is a factor that has abundances.They were then used to
contributed to the growing use of on-site study the dynamics of exploited and
visual assessments.These methods are unexploited populations, and the ecology
also more comprehensive, more accurate and management of natural resources and
and non-destructive. Underwater visual environments.The use of UVC requires
censuses (UVC) were first used to qualified and trained staff.

Summary of the various sampling method categories

Sampling techniques Quality of data Needs
Comprehen- Accuracy Coverage Bias linked to Staff training Costs

siveness life cycle

Capture Low* Low to High Yes Low Low
moderate

Mixed (combined) Low Moderate Moderate Yes High High

Non-capture High High Low No High Moderate

* except for explosives and poisons

4



II - Background information on
underwater visual fish census surveys

II.1 – Basic principles 3. the diver’s physiology in the aquatic
environment, in the case of

underwater visual census methods are snorkeling. In those cases when they
based on on-site visual counts of are not able to conduct the census

organisms. Census methods can be done from the surface, observers are
in a variety of ways, the most common of limited by their inability to remain
which is by either snorkelling or scuba div- underwater without breathing. Use of
ing. In certain instances, cameras, video scuba equipment involves depth and
cameras or submersible gear can be used time limits that cannot be surpassed
to get around the constraints linked to without endangering the diver. Divers
sampling by divers. are also limited by their inability to

withstand cold and fatigue.
Use of underwater visual censuses is limit-
ed by: For all these reasons, underwater visual
1. visibility, which must be adequate to censuses involving snorkelling or scuba are

record useful information. If the water best carried out in clear, calm and shallow
is too turbid (e.g. around rivers estuar- water (generally between the surface and a
ies, mangroves, mining areas, etc.) depth of 20 m).
and/or there is minimum light (e.g.
during night diving, or limited light pen- Censuses can be conducted in three ways:
etration into the water), this method is along random paths (chosen by chance),
difficult, if not impossible, to use; using quadrats (grids moved along a tran-

2. the state of the ocean and, more sect by divers) or transects, or from sta-
generally, weather conditions; and tionary points. Only the latter two fish

5



census methods are discussed in this man- II.2 – Which types of data for exactly
ual; the other method is rarely used and what kind of information?
can generate other problems related to
resource assessments. The data collected and the sampling strate-

gy used determine the type of information
A transect is a rectangular area whose that can be obtained. This can differ accord-
length and width is clearly defined.The cen- ing to whether a qualitative or quantitative
sus, or count, is carried out within the inventory of fisheries resources is required.
boundaries of the transect, which is general-
ly denoted out by a flexible graduated tape Information of interest to reef fisheries
measure, which is rolled out on the seafloor. management can be divided into two
Counting is conducted on either side of this categories.
tape within a set area. This is one of the 1. The state and size of food and/or
most commonly used methods, and is well commercial fish stocks, or those of
suited to population studies, particularly interest due to their ecological
those assessing fisheries resources for com- aspects (biological indicator). This
mercial or food purposes. includes analysis of the populations’

structure.
Censuses can also be done by counting 2. The state of the reef habitat, which
from stationary points. In this case, the supports the resource, including
observer begins counting from a deter- associated living organisms.
mined point while slowly turning in a circle.
This method is quicker than laying a tran- This information is mainly designed to:
sect. It is particularly recommended for 1. make it possible to carry out compar-
studying a species or small group of isons in space (resource location and
species, especially in very heterogeneous determination of its characteristics
environments, and for isolated complex depending on site, biotope or zones
structures or large-size formations (coral subject to unequal fishing pressures)
heads, large boulders). and/or time (resource monitoring,

6



changing trends and detecting by fishing activities and so, in certain cases,
changes); and are a reflection of fishing intensity.

2. determine correlations between the
resource and its environment. Counting can be conducted in a fixed rec-

tangular area (transect) or a circular area
II.2.1 – Status of fish stocks2 (stationary points), where respective

a – Identifying and counting species lengths, widths or diametres have been
Identifying and counting species provides previously determined (fixed distance
an estimate of species richness (i.e. the counting). The observer counts the fish
number of species), particularly for envi- within the area laid out. For a given
ronmental inventories. This can be limited species, the estimate of the mean density
to a sector of the population for food D on a transect of width d and length L is
and/or commercial purposes or else can expressed as:
be conducted from an ecological point of

p
view.This is an important parameter to
consider. Any appreciable attack on the Σni

D = i=1     where ni: number of fish seen
environment, such as the destruction of Ld
coral, usually brings about a decrease in
species richness, which is an indication of In the case of stationary points, density is
biodiversity (i.e. number of species, and expressed as:
their percentage in the population).

p where ni: number of fish seen
b – Counting individuals Σni r : radius chosen for observation.
Individuals are counted to estimate abun- D = i=1     

Πr2

dance (number of fish) and density (the
number of fish per surface area unit) (e.g.
individuals per square metre). Abundance
and density are factors that can be affected

2 The term ‘stock’ is not used in the fisheries sense but rather as a definition of the quantity (in numbers or weight) of fish that
exists in a given environment. 7



Correctly estimating densities by this afterwards. The observer assesses and
method assumes: records the perpendicular distance of fish

the observer does not overlook any as viewed from the transect or stationary
fish in the set surface area, an unat- point. In the case of schools of fish, two
tainable but desirable goal; and distances are taken into consideration: the
individuals are counted only once distance from the transect (or stationary
(see Section II.3). point) to the fish closest to it; and the dis-

tance from transect (or stationary point)
This method should especially be used for to the fish farthest away from it.
counting populations of fairly sedentary
fish (where there is a low risk of error As with the first method, correct estima-
due to rapid individual movement).This tion of density is based on certain
method tends to bring about an under- assumptions.
assessment of density and biomass. The 1. Fish are not counted twice;
width selected for a transect also has an 2. The fish’s distance is determined at
effect on results. The wider the transect, the position where it was first
the lower the density estimate, which is observed;
logical given that the farther away fish are, 3. The probability of detecting fish with-
the less chance they have of being in the transect is equal to 1, which
observed. This relationship varies accord- means it is presumed that all individ-
ing to species and groups of species, and uals along the tape measure have
is fairly significant for large individuals and been seen and counted.
more mobile species. This method provides good coverage for

less mobile species and also limits errors
Counting can also be conducted by taking due to rapid movements or fish fleeing
into account the fish’s distance from the when encountered during fixed-distance
transect or stationary point at the time of counts (see Section II.3.2). For this rea-
observation (variable distance counting). son, it is better adapted to resource
In this case, surface areas are calculated assessment.

8



BASIC CONCEPTS OF
THE SAMPLING-BY-DISTANCE THEORY

Counting individuals while estimating their distance from the transect or stationary point is
based on the fact that not all detectable fish are necessarily seen.  It is founded on the theo-
ry that detectability — the probability of detecting a fish — decreases with observation dis-
tance.  In other words, the farther away from the transect or stationary point an individual
is, the lower the chances are that it will be observed.  Calculating densities depends on the
detectability function g(x).  From these observations, it is possible to extrapolate for a given
species, family or population, a curve showing the probability of sighting the fish based on
its distance from the transect.  Estimated density D is expressed as follows:

p

Σni dmax

D = i=1     where a =  g(x)dx
La 0

ni : number of fish
L: length of transect 
dmax: perpendicular distance from the transect to the limit of detectability

c – Assessing individual size stock present in the environment:
Size assessment allows estimation of: total weight for a given sampled area.

mean sizes;
mean weights (from existing As with abundance and density, mean fish
size–weight ratios); sizes and biomasses are parameters that
biomass, which is fresh weight per are affected by fishing activities, particular-
surface area unit (e.g. g/m2 or kg/ha); ly with regards to the most heavily target-
this is calculated using the individual ted species. For example, in the specific
mean weights and abundances; case of untouched, or unexploited stock,

9



the introduction of fishing activities will a – Constant factors (or those that vary
rapidly lead to a decrease in mean size only slightly)
and biomass for the largest and most Location of the site (geographic
long-lived species. coordinates + name of site and pos-

sibly landmarks)
II.2.2 – Environmental factors Type of environment or biotope

Depending on the research question and (barrier, intermediate or fringing reef)
the resources available to observers, one Reef section (slope, forereef, etc.)
or more environmental factors can be Prevailing wind direction
recorded. The morphology of the study Depth (min. and max.)
area has an effect on the population’s Substrate
organisation, so it is particularly important Type of activity (e.g. regulated or
to determine the relationships between unregulated fishing area, reserve, eco-
habitats (substrate, covering organisms, tourism site)
etc.) and the parameters that describe
the resource (species richness, density, b – Variable factors
biomass). Date and time (beginning and end)

Visibility
Environmental factors can be divided into Current
two categories: constant factors and vari- Salinity
able factors. Water temperature

Substrate-covering organisms
Associated organisms (invertebrates)

10



SUMMARY TABLE
DATA INFORMATION

Number of species Species richness
+

Number of individuals Density
and allowance for distances

(fixed or variable)
+

Size estimates Mean sizes,
mean weights,

biomass

Fish/habitat    correlations

Environmental factors:
- constant Mean substrate composition
- variable Living organism cover

II.3 – Sources of error minimising them, and taking them into
account during analysis and interpretation

No assessment method is perfect of the results.
and underwater visual censuses also
include sources of error. Errors mainly II.3.1 – Sources of error due to the diver
come from one of three sources: the These can be linked to the observer,
observer, fish behaviour, and the and/or to interactions between observers
sampling method. Understanding these and fish. The methods used can also be a
sources of error is vital for both source of error.

11



a – Errors caused by the observer fish). As a result, environmental, psycholog-
Due to diving time limits and the often shy ical, and physical conditions of observers’
nature of the animals surveyed, observers work should have as little influence on
must be able to record information as them as possible. This means that
quickly as possible, and rapidly identify and observers should master diving techniques
estimate sizes and distances with a reason- and not be subject to disturbances that
able level of accuracy. The slightest hesita- reduce the acuity of their eyesight and/or
tion will result in a loss of data. Observers their motor skills.
may pay more attention to one group of
fish or a part of the population that inter- b – Observer – fish interaction
ests them more, and this also constitutes a Such interactions mainly involve changes
systematic error. Observers may also have in fish behaviour due to the diver’s pres-
a tendency to over or underestimate sizes ence. These changes vary and may result
and/or distances. Moreover, there is always in either the fish fleeing away from, or
a risk of counting the same fish several being attracted to, the diver. For example,
times. Finally, in the case of variable dis- some species, such as those from the
tance counts, consideration must be given Plectropomus (coral trout) genus, tend to
to the fact that fish detectability tends to be attracted to observers and follow
increase with size for almost all species, and them around. In contrast, spangled
with the size of the school for certain fish emperors (Lethrinus nebulosus) tend to
(number of individuals in a school). keep away by remaining at the limit of vis-

ibility. Such behaviour also depends on
Hesitation, inattention or paying too much the individuals’ activity cycle (diurnal vs
attention to a certain area, are all increased nocturnal), age and location. The simulta-
when the conditions under which the cen- neous trajectories of the fish and observ-
sus is being conducted worsen (e.g. due to er can bring about either negative or pos-
strong currents, fatigue or cold) or when itive biases in size estimation, depending
the quantity of information to be recorded on whether they are swimming in the
is too great (too many species, too many same direction or in opposite directions

12



with an angle of vision that differs more it is difficult to make a comprehensive
than 90° from the transect. assessment of fish populations. It should

also be noted that populations seen and
The diver’s movement as well as the sampled only account for a portion of all
method used, also has an influence on fish the species that live in the study area.
behaviour (e.g. the noise from air bubbles
coming out of scuba diving equipment). The various biological and ecological char-
Regular visits to a site, particularly for mon- acteristics of fish influence measurements
itoring, tend to decrease attraction or flee- and estimates. Any interpretation of results
ing reactions, thus minimising these biases. must take into account that not all species

are perceived (and therefore estimated) in
II.3.2 – Sources of error due to fish the same way.

The main sources of error due to fish
come from the distribution of species in II.3.3 – Sources of error due to sampling
time and space. This depends on different Most sampling errors arise because results
parameters associated with habitat, behav- depend not only on the elements (all tran-
iour and activity cycles. sects or stationary points) that make up the

sample (n), but also on the method itself.
Certain sedentary species living in rock or
coral crevices during the day, coming out A sample is a limited subset of a popula-
only at night, may not be detected by tion, from which the results obtained from
observers. The same is true for those fish the observed data are based. For techni-
that only come out of their hiding places cal, economic or simply logistical reasons
briefly, or those that are highly mobile or (destruction of specimens, as when fish are
which colonise certain biotopes during cer- caught by experimental fishing), it is nor-
tain seasons. The probability of encounter- mally not possible to collect data on the
ing species and thus being able to count entire population. Study of a limited set
them, is influenced by their behaviour and makes it possible to increase both the
their home range or territory. This is why number of measurements and their degree

13



of accuracy. Extrapolation of the findings study period). Samples that are not taken
obtained from sampling generally results in according to a strict sampling plan (random
estimates for the entire population, which or reasoned) will not be representative of
have a reasonable level of acuracy. If two the target fish population. The sample is
samples composed of a given number of considered to be equal to the statistical
elements (set of transects or stationary population (n=N).
points) are observed, the measurements
calculated for each will be different, but will A transect’s position and orientation can
result in comparable estimates of popula- be considered sources of error associated
tion parameters.The statistical population with sampling. It is better to have a tran-
is defined as all the N elements from sect that covers an homogeneous environ-
which conclusions are based (i.e. the N ment, rather than one covering several dif-
surface area units corresponding to all pos- ferent environments. Transitional areas
sible transects in which censuses can be between different biotopes should, there-
conducted in the selected zone during the fore, be strictly avoided.

IN BRIEF

Total error = 

observation errors (due to the observer)

+ target population coverage errors 
(due to observer – fish interactions and to fish)

+ sampling errors 
(systematic error + random error)

14



REMEMBER…
The accuracy of population estimates depends on the size of the sample (number of transects) and variability (dif-
ferences between the measurements for each transect).This variability in individual measurements or random error
(dispersion) must not be mistaken for systematic error (bias).

In the figures below, the centre of the target represents the parameter to be estimated and the black dots corre-
spond to measurements made in the transect. Four model situations are given:

Low bias Low bias High bias High bias
Low dispersion High dispersion Low dispersion High dispersion

Lack of accuracy can be linked to high bias and/or high dispersion.The ideal situation is shown in the
first picture (low bias, low dispersion).

Sampling-related bias can be reduced by randomly selecting sample elements.

Errors in observation and representativity do not decrease when the size of the sample increases.

Dispersion depends on the population’s heterogeneity. It is measured by variance.

When dispersion is high (i.e. there are significant differences between transects), better estimates will
be gained by stratifying the population (e.g. by biotope).

15



II.4 – How to limit sources of error Acanthuridae (surgeonfish)
Siganidae (rabbitfish)

II.4.1 – Observer training Kyphosidae (drummer, chub)
While it is relatively difficult, if not impossi- Holocentridae (squirrelfish)
ble, to minimise errors due to fish, it is eas- Haemulidae (sweetlips)
ier to limit those due to observers through Chaetodontidae (butterflyfish), act as
proper mastery of diving and counting ecological indicators of coral reef
techniques. This comes about through fol- health and can also be added to this

lowing certain rules during on-site use of list.

the method (see Section III) and by keep-
ing in mind that divers should have regular The first key to identifying fish is their

training to minimise errors caused by poor shape, which is generally the same for

diving techniques. almost all the species in a given family
(Appendix 1).

a – Identifying fish
This is the first step of training. Most reef The visual morphological characteristics

fish of interest for marketing and/or con- that identify a species within a family are

sumption belong to about 15 families, the shape, colour of markings, and any dis-

main ones are listed below. tinctive traits such as spots, lines or
Serranidae (grouper, rockcod, stripes, and their location on the body
seabass) and/or fins. Behaviour and preferred
Carangidae (trevally, jack) biotopes are also useful information for
Lutjanidae (snapper and seaperch) identification.These must all be learned
Caesionidae (fusiliers, bananafish) and memorised, which is perhaps the
Lethrinidae (sea bream and most tedious part of training. The
emperor) appearance of some fish changes over
Mullidae (goatfish) the life cycle; for example, many wrasse
Labridae (wrasse) and parrotfish have different coulours
Scaridae (parrotfish) during their juvenile and adult phases.

16



In the same way, colours for a single b – Counting individuals
species can differ according to sex. Difficulties counting fish are mainly due to the
Parrotfish are a good illustration. limitations of the human eye, which can only

count four objects at any one time.
Training in fish identification involves Moreover, precise counting cannot be carried
classroom-learning using available tools out on more than 10 to 20 individuals in the
(see ‘To Find Out More’ section), and on- case of a relatively sedentary school. Taking
site exercises during dives. In order to into account these limits, and in order to
avoid confusion over the use of common compensate for them, the most commonly
names, it is preferable to use each used technique for counting schools is the
species’ scientific name, which is always so-called group-counting method.This con-
made up of a genus name (e.g. Lethrinus, sists of counting a ‘group’ of 10 to 20 fish.This
the genus name for certain breams and group becomes the basic counting unit and
emperorfish) followed by a species name the observer judges how many groups there
(e.g. nebulosus; thus forming the name are in the entire area occupied by the school
Lethrinus nebulosus, or spangled emperor). of fish. For large schools (> 200 individuals),
In practice, it is best to begin learning it may be useful to combine groups into
about 50 species that are easily identifi- super-groups, containing 5 to 10 base groups.
able. A list of fish, which are of food and
commercial interest, is given in Appendix In more complex instances where a school
2. If fish from a certain family cannot be of fish is made up of several different
precisely identified during a dive, the species (multispecies school), observers are
observer must be able to rapidly note its encouraged to begin counting the most
main features (e.g. shape, colours, mark- abundant (or most numerous) species. The
ings) so as to identify it through books same applies to schools with a range of
afterwards. The use of simple sketches to sizes. During training, taking photographs is
illustrate and record specific marks on a good way to evaluate errors made, and to
the body is invaluable. find out at what level they occurred.

17



c – Estimating individual sizes Once back on land, the diver’s estimates are
In order to obtain acceptable results, size compared with the real sizes; this compari-
estimates must reach a certain level of accu- son allows the diver’s performance to be
racy.The relative difference in sizes must not evaluated and shows how much progress
be more than 20% and should be closer to has been made. The simplest way is to
10% whenever possible. Numerous factors make a dot graph with the various estimat-
can affect estimates, including the magnifying ed values recorded on the ‘y’ axis, and the
effect of water (or mask magnification), the real sizes of the cut-outs on the ‘x’ axis. The
angle the fish is viewed from, water clarity,
and the fish’s shape. Visual effects linked to 

the shape of fish
One of the most commonly used training
methods consists of making cut-outs of fish These fish are the same in length and yet the
of various shapes and sizes corresponding bottom one appears longer!
to the main families to be assessed (see
Appendix I). These cut-outs can be easily
made using marine plywood or PVC. They
are attached to a 150 m weighted line
dropped in the water and moored at both
ends. The sizes of the cut-outs must cover
the entire range of likely fish lengths, from
10 to 100 cm. The diver swims along the
line at a preset distance (generally three Acanthuridae

metres at the beginning of training). He
then notes the number, and estimates the
size of each cut-out. At the beginning of
training, a few reference cut-outs, with the
true size indicated, can be used as reference
points for estimating the sizes of the others. Mullidae

18



dots should adhere as closely as possible to Calibration line used to measure 
the straight line where ‘x’ is equal to ‘y’, (i.e. an observer’s ability to estimate sizes.
where the estimated values correspond to
the real values). Dots situated above this
straight line show that the observer overes- 100 -

timated the sizes of the cut-outs. On the 90 -

other hand, when the dots are below the Overestimated sizes
80 -

line, the diver has understimated the sizes.
Generally, it is not useful to analyse each 70 -

separate dot, but rather to note the overall 60 -

trend in order to see whether the observer 50 -
has a general tendency to overestimate or

40 - Underestimated sizes
underestimate sizes and in which range this
occurs. Observers may make preferential 30 -

errors, such as systematically underestimat- 20 -
ing the size of larger fish while correctly esti-

10 -
mating the sizes of smaller ones. 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

Real sizes (in cm)
To go into further detail, performances can

The results of observations recorded on this
be subjected to statistical analysis (t test on graph must come as close as possible to the
the correlation between estimated sizes straight line.
and real sizes). In order to ensure a correct
estimate of fish sizes, training must be d – Estimating distances (in the case of
repeated until reported sizes are close variable distance counts)
enough to real sizes (margins of error As with sizes, observers must pay careful
under 20%). For confirmation, a few fish attention when estimating distances
can be caught during sampling campaigns, because water has a tendency to magnify
measured and their sizes compared with objects. Water clarity can also lead to
estimates. assessment errors. For that reason, when

19

Estimated sizes (in cm)

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-



the water is clear, there is a tendency to II.4.2 – Basic rules for designing sampling sur-
underestimate distances, whereas distances veys and selecting transects or 
are overestimated in turbid waters. stationary points

Training in estimating distances perpendicu- A. Methodological approach
lar to the transect can be conducted by It is difficult, if not impossible, to eliminate
laying out two tape measures. These all the problems associated with sampling.
measures serve as reference points at pre- A successful sampling campaign comes
determined distances on either side of the from following a methodological approach
transect, along with objects whose distance comprised of specific stages.
from the transect is also known… to
everyone but the diver in training. As with a) Thorough planning
fish sizes, results obtained by observers can The planning phase is indispensable for
be compared with the real distances. The determining justifiable choices. Proper plan-
exercise can be repeated, taking into ning allows bias to be minimised, increases
account errors (under or overestimation) the study’s accuracy, and avoids problems
until the margin of error is reduced. associated with sampling, which are too

often only noted once data have already
The ability to correctly estimate sizes been collected.
and distances decreases with time; for
that reason, training or sampling The best way to validate

must be carried out on a regular basis so as measurements and verify data is 
to maintain an acceptable level of to use and interprete them!
performance.

The planning phase must answer the fol-
lowing questions:

Which exact organisms will be
observed  in order to respond to
the problem? For example, this can

20



involve counting all the fish or only Which measurement method
counting those fish of commercial should be used? In our case, this
interest; involves the underwater visual census
Which approach should be used? survey method.
The approach can be experimental Which type of sampling strategy
(the cause of the phenomenon to be should be selected? This can involve
studied is induced, by closing and a simple random sampling, one which
opening a fishing area) or descriptive is stratified by biotope, systematic,
(the phenomenon is described etc.
through sampling the study popula- Which parameters are to be esti-
tion: this is the case for sampling in mated? This can be the mean or
areas subject to different fishing total of a quantitative variable (num-
intensities); ber of fish, density, biomass), or the
What constitutes the basic element percentage of a qualitative variable
on which observations will be (% of species), etc.
made? In our case, this means either
transects or stationary points. b) Acquiring high quality data
What is the study population? This This depends on how collection is carried
covers all the elements (transects or out and on the sampling strategy.
stationary points) and is defined by
four factors: its nature (e.g. transect), c) Rational use of the data
specific characteristics (e.g. transect This includes processing and interpretation
length), location (e.g. southwest but also the conclusions/decisions and the
lagoon) and the date on which it is result formulation phase.
observed (e.g. August 2001);
Which variables should be consid-
ered? These are the element’s attrib-
utes. Variables can be quantitative Planning for both sampling and data
(e.g. number of fish in the transect, processing must be carried out
fish size, density, biomass) or qualita- simultaneously so as to better justify
tive (fish species). ‘why’ and ‘how’ the collection will be made.

21



B. Sample size observation (each transect), the number of
Sample size refers to the number of tran- transects can be found by:
sects needed to arrive at a mean assess-
ment representative of the population; this n=C/c
must include at least two elements in
order to measure dispersion. But two is C. Sampling plan
not enough; the more heterogeneous the The sampling plan is the strategy for defin-
population is, the greater the sample size ing the population to be assessed. The sam-
must be.To estimate a population parame- ple selection method (choice of elements),
ter to within 10% (p=0.1) — 5 chances formulation of the estimator, and the char-
out of 100 of making a mistake in setting acteristics of the study population will all be
the value of this parameter (alpha=5%) — determined by this plan. Bias, cost and
the theoretical sample size is found by: accuracy criteria should be considered dur-

the mean: n0=t2S2/P2 ing the selection of a sampling plan.
a percentage of an infinite population
(N>10,000): n0=P(100-P)t2/P2 Randomly selecting sample units ensures
a finite population (N<10,000): that selection of one individual does not
n = n0 / (1+n0 / N) influence selection of others. This means

that study staff should not be given any lat-
itude in selection. Random selection can

Where S2: sample variance (see definition of
be conducted in a number of ways such as

variance on page 24);
by a computerised selection of geographic

P: percentage of a modality of a qualitative
coordinates, selecting squares in a gridded

variable (e.g. percentage of females in the ‘sex’ variable,
area, or by simply pointing a pencil at a

which comprises two modalities, males and females)
map…blindfolded!

The sample size can also be calculated It is sometimes difficult to define a random
based on cost. If you take the total study sample. Non-random sampling can give
budget (C) and the unit cost (c) per useful results, providing the selection of

22



DEFINING VARIANCE

Variance is a measurement of dispersion in the study population. In the theoretical example
below, the measurements of a sample’s (n) elements are considered to be weights laid out on a
horizontal bar, with each weight associated with an individual value.

X = 8.6

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17

X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7

The mean (X) corresponds to a point at which it becomes possible to balance negative and
positive differences:

X X
= 1 + X2 + X3 + X4 + X5 + X6 + X7

n
By replacing each measurement with its numerical value, the formula becomes:

X= 2 + 4 + 5 + 8 + 11 + 14 + 16 = 8.6
7

Variance (S2) is equal to the mean of the square of the sum of the differences between the
measurement (Xi ) and the mean (X):

n
Σ (X

S2 i - X)2

= i
n

Using the values in the example, we get:

(2 - 8.6)2 + (4 - 8.6)2 + ......+ (16 - 8.6)2

S2 = 7 = 24

23



elements can be controlled (reasoned stratification factor or factors and the
choice) and by carefully avoiding any hasty characteristic studied. This means that
generalisations. It often represents the most the structure of the population must
economical method for exploratory studies. already be known and understood.

Cluster sampling (in varying
A difference must be made between a degrees): involves carrying out a ran-

dom sampling composed of units
probability sample survey — where each

which are themselves sub-groups of
individual of the population has a previously the population (or clusters). The
known probability of belonging to the sam- combined units within each sub-
ple (scientifically thorough with a mathemat- group are always representative of
ical theory to support it) — and an empiri- the population.
cal sampling survey, which does not allow Systematic sampling: consists of sys-
calculation of the probability of individual tematically sampling an ‘n’ number of
inclusion (quotas, standard units). The latter elements separated by a constant
survey is less thorough but its use is often interval (interval of time, space, num-
dictated by budgetary considerations. ber of lines, etc.). The first element

must be chosen on a random basis.
This type of sampling is frequently

The main probability sample survey plans
used in underwater visual census

are:
Simple random sampling: where all resource assessments.

elements of the population have the
The estimates presented below involve sim-

same probability of belonging to the
sample. ple random sampling plans. They can be

Stratified sampling: consists of dividing extrapolated from systematic sampling (on
the population into more homoge- the condition that the first element, say a
neous sub-groups. In each stratum, a transect, is chosen at random). This can be
random sampling is taken. In order to applied at different scales and allows com-
benefit from stratification, a strong parisons in space (e.g. between biotopes)
correlation must exist between the and/or time (e.g. between two dates).

24



IN BRIEF …

A sampling strategy comprises several aspects:

1) Selecting the population to which the study's conclusions will be applied 
(particularly with regards to space and/or time limits).

2) Selecting the sample size, which is determined by cost constraints and the level 
of accuracy desired.

3) Selecting the (n) elements of the sample (sample design).

4) Determining how information about the sample will be gathered 
(sampling technique = underwater visual census survey).

25



III – Setting up variable distance
underwater visual fish census 
surveys 

The methods presented in this section 4) proper surface security measures and
are based on the distance sampling safety conditions are followed on the

theory. For that reason, they take into boat;
account the fish’s distance from the tran- 5) vital safety equipment functions
sect or stationary point. properly (e.g. VHF radio, emergency

oxygen supply, first aid kit, list of
III.1 – Review of safety rules for diving medical staff and services to be con-

work tacted in the case of an emergency).
Diving is an activity involving a certain
number of risks that can be minimised by You must be in good physical and
following some basic rules, reviewed mental condition before each dive.  
below. Do not dive if you have a cold, are

tired, have recently eaten a heavy meal,
Before each dive, make certain: or have consumed alcohol within the last
1) your diving medical fitness certificate 12 hours.

is still valid (to be renewed annually);
2) you get an up-to-date weather During the dive:

report, if possible; 1) NEVER DIVE ALONE (there should
3) your equipment is in good condi- always be a minimum of 2 divers)

tion and operates properly, particu- 2) Keep visual contact with your dive
larly your buoyancy vest, tank and partner(s) at all times and, if possible,
regulator ; do not move away from them.

26



3) If you lose your dive partner(s), stay 6) In general, try to stay under the time
for a minute where you are and turn limit beyond which decompression is
around in a circle (360°); then, slowly necessary.
ascend looking for the other diver’s 7) Always ascend slowly (do not go
air bubbles. Near the surface turn faster than the speed of the small air
completely around (360°). As soon bubbles).
as you arrive at the surface, inflate
your vest and make an OK sign to After the dive:
the dive master. NEVER GO BACK 1) Record your diving parameters (sites,
DOWN ALONE. Wait for the oth- maximum depths reached, total time,
ers. length of pauses, specific facts).

4) Avoid going up and down (‘yoyo’ 2) Carefully rinse your equipment with
movement). fresh water and check its condition.

5) For dives whose maximum depth is 3) Avoid any strenuous physical effort
greater than 10 m, systematically or free diving for eight hours follow-
make a three-minute safety pause at ing your final dive.
three metres before coming to the 4) Do not take a plane within 24 hours
surface. after your final dive.

It is worth noting that in almost all recorded diving accidents over the past few years, one
or more of these rules was not followed.  Following them would have undoubtedly helped

save many lives.  Never forget that all divers are responsible for both their own safety and
that of their fellow divers.

27



III.2 – Equipment

On the boat be sure there are:
ID books (see ‘To Find Out More…’
section)
different coloured pocket folders (1
for the blank record sheets, 1 for
completed sheets)
1 portable GPS + spare batteries
erasers
pencil sharpener

Fifty-metre measuring tape 
HINT

In order to keep books dry and ensure that
they do not get damaged, keep them covered
with plastic, and keep water- and moisture-
sensitive materials in a waterproof container
(such as a cooler or eski).

For working underwater, you should
have:

3 fifty-metre measuring tapes 
1 hard plastic board with clips (at
least two) per diver 
record sheets (at least 3 station
sheets and 5 fish record sheets)
pencils (at least 2 per diver : 1 in the
sleeve of the diving suit or knife Hard plastic clip board 

28



sheath + 1 attached by string to the During the dive:
board) Before descending, make a final
waterproof watch check with your buddy to ensure
depth gauge nothing has been forgotten (double

verification).
HINT Descend.

Once you arrive at the bottom,
It is better to use wood-free synthetic resin determine the starting point for the
pencils, as these have the advantage of not transect.
splitting and having stonger lead. Attach one end of the measuring

tape to a rock, or in the sand, using a
metal stake and lay the other two

III.3 – Transects measuring tapes next to it.
Determine the direction for laying

The method presented below uses stan- out the measuring tape.
dard 50-metre-long transects. Wait two or three minutes to give

the fish time to calm down and get
On the boat before the dive: use to your presence.

fill in the top part of the station Begin counting the fish.
sheet with general information about One of the divers unrolls the meas-
the station (e.g. station number, GPS uring tape as the count progresses.
position, brief description, etc) (see
Appendix 4). Do the same thing on
the fish data record sheet (see
Appendix 3).

29



50 m

40 m

30 m

Diver 1 Main transect

20 m

10 m

Diver 2

3-D view of a visual census survey using transects

30



RULES TO FOLLOW DURING THE COUNT

1) It is best to work in sections of about three metres each as this helps avoid counting the same
fish more than once.

2) In cases where each diver counts on one side of the transect, care must be taken to ensure
divers proceed at the same rate.  If only one diver is conducting the count, he must first
count on one side and then on the other.  The tape is then unrolled by the other diver, who
stands by while the observer continues to work.

3) Do not stay in any one spot too long and do not count fish who enter your field of vision too
long a time after you have stopped.  If they must be counted, then situate them at the outer
limit of visibility.

4) If possible, begin by counting the most abundant species.
5) Given the theories related to variable distance censuses (see Section II.2.1), systematically

give greater importance to fish that are near the transects.  In practical terms, it is important
at each stop to begin counting in the immediate vicinity of the transect and then pay atten-
tion to species farther away (i.e. carry out observations from the transect towards the limit of
visibility).

6) Always fill out the dive sheet in the same way.  Mark the name of the fish (see remark
below), then the number, size and finally the perpendicular distances to the transect.

7) Scientific names are sometimes long and tedious to write underwater, so don't hesitate to use
abbreviations when these are easily understandable and can be immediately recalled after-
wards.  For example, you might write Acant xant for Acanthurus xanthopterus, or Sc riv for
Scarus rivulatus.

31



1) Stay close to the measuring tape HOW TO ESTIMATE VISIBILITY?
and do not move away from it in
order to avoid distorting estimates A simple method consists of placing a clip-
of the perpendicular distances of board vertically at some point along the main
fish from the transect. transect.  On your way back to wind up the

2) Don't forget that the transect is 50 metres tape or record the substrate, note the distance
long.  Care must be taken to not go over on the tape when the clipboard first becomes
one end or the other. Imagine perpendicu- visible to you.
lar lines on the transect at 0 and 50
metres, which constitute the count bound-
aries.  When two divers conduct the For each of the three transects and
count, both must count within the bound- in every 10-metre section, identify
aries set out by the transect (i.e. the 50 m once every metre the nature of the
tape measure).  If in doubt about whether substrate and the living organism
a fish has already been counted by your cover just below the measuring tape.
team mate, ask. Record your observations on the

station sheet by putting check marks
Once the fish count is done, leave in the corresponding headings (see
the main transect in place and unroll Appendix 3)
the other two tape measures about In the one-metre strips on either
three metres on either side of the side of each transect, count the num-

3
main transect . ber of associated organisms (inverte-
Record the visibility, current and brates).
other known parameters for this sta- On the back of the station sheet,
tion in the top part of the station record any special remarks about
sheet (see Appendix 4). that station.

3 In the case of fixed distance counting, the three tape measures can be laid out three metres apart at the beginning of the dive.
32



d 1 = d 2
Diver 1

d 2
d 1 3  m

50 m
0          1          10   m                  2                      2 0   m                   3                       30   m                  4                        4 0  m           5 3  m

( Sectors )

Ancilliary transect (substrate + living organism cover)

Diver 2 Main transect (count fish + substrate + living organism cover)

2-D view of a visual census survey using transects

Make sure the sheets have been filled On land:
out fully and accurately. Rinse the sheets one by one in fresh
Roll up the three tape measures. water, then place them separately to
Begin your ascent (see recommenda- dry.
tions for diving work). Once they are dry, take the sheets

and finish or correct them, as need-
After the dive: ed.

Begin data entry.
On the boat:

Proceed with initial discussions III.4 – Stationary points
immediately, then complete and cor-
rect the sheets, if necessary. The steps to follow before getting into the
Take the sheets off the clipboards water are exactly the same as those men-
and put them into the corresponding tioned for transect counting. This also
plastic pocket folders. applies to the after-diving rules and the

33



important points to follow during the dive. Record the results of your observa-
The specific characteristics associated with tions on the station sheet by putting
stationary point counts are as follows: check marks in the corresponding

4
While treading water, visually deter- sections (see Appendix 4) .
mine the observation point. Once identification is done, move the
Without standing on the bottom, outer two tape measures 2 metres
come upright in the water and count farther on, repeating the same oper-
the number of fish within the central ation for the two new transects.
circle (i.e. in a one-metre radius In each of the transects you have
around the observation point). now laid out, count the number of
Once you are done counting within associated organisms (invertebrates)
the central circle, stand on the sea found within a one-metre strip on
floor at the observation point and either side of the tape measures.
identify a reference radial so as to
continue the census.
Continue counting from this refer-
ence point while slowly turning in a
complete circle (360°). Follow the
same rules as for transects.
Once the fish count is done, unroll a
10-m tape measure, centring it on
the observation point. Then unroll
the other two 10-m tape measures
two metres apart on either side of it.
In each of the three transects laid
out in this way, identify once every
metre the type of substrate and the
living organism cover below the tape.

4 Each transect corresponds to a different section on the data entry sheet.

34



Stationary observation point
Reference radius

0°
C e n t r a l c i r c l e

d 1 = d 2

180° d 1
d 2

3-D view of a visual census survey using stationary points

35



10 m

0

2 m
Substrate + living organism cover transects

(1 reading per meter)

e n
t r a l c i r c l

d 1 = d 2

d 1

d 2

180°

Vertical view of a stationary point visual census survey

WORK DOUBLES AS TRAINING…
You should seize every possible opportunity to calibrate your measurements and improve your
size and distance estimation skills.

1) When a fish is stationary on the sea floor, note the land marks corresponding to the ends of
its head and tail, then measure how far apart they are with the ruled edge of your clip-
board.

2) When moving down the transect, make it a habit to estimate the distance to the next stopping
point and then compare this estimate to the real distance as shown by the tape measure.

3) When you move away from the transect to identify a species, try to measure the distance sep-
arating the fish from the transect by using as a reference, say, the length of your own body.
In this case, be careful not to record any fish that were not observed from the transect.

36

C

e



IV – using the data collected
IV.1 – Entering and formatting data IV.2 – Calculating densities, biomass

and stock (numeric and weighted)
Special attention must be paid to data
entry, coding and formatting of data. The For variable distance transects or stationary
results of the assessment will depend on points, the density and biomass estimates
how well this work is done. presented below are based on the calcula-

tion of a mean weighted distance (dm) of
The main purpose of data entry is to allow the individuals in the transect or at the sta-
rapid computer processing of data. The tionary point. For most species, this pro-
risks inherent in this operation arise mainly duces results that are comparable to other
from the additional source of error it rep- methods that require adjusting a mathemati-
resents. In those cases where data are cal function to the fish detectability curve in
entered directly into a spreadsheet pro- order to estimate the parameter (a) (see
gramme, double entry is strongly advised, if Section II.2.1).This calculation method also
possible by two different operators. The has the advantage of being simple.
two sheets can then be compared for veri-
fication purposes, thereby making it possi- In order to do this, either side of the tran-
ble to limit the sources of error associated sect is divided into one-metre-wide corri-
with transferring data into the computer. dors, the closest at 0 to 1 metres, the sec-

ond at 1 to 2 metres, etc. Depending on
HINT the fish’s distance at the time of observa-

In order to facilitate data entry, it is better tion, it will then be associated with one of
to have each entry line correspond to an these corridors and given its median value
observation and to make a column for each (i.e. the middle of that category). For
parameter in the order in which they appear example, if an indiviudal is recorded at a
on the site record sheet whenever possible

perpendicular distance of 2 metres from
(see Appendix 3).

the transect, it will be considered to have

37



been seen in the 2 to 3 metre corridor.The The biomass estimate is obtained through
distance value used in the calculation will be 2 the use of length-weight ratios:
+ 0.5 = 2.5 metres, which corresponds to the

p
median of the 2 to 3 metre category. Σnij . Wij

B i=       
i = 1        (3)

For that reason, the mean weighted distance dmjL
of a species is given by:

where Wi: estimated weight of fish i using length–weight
p ratios
Σnij (dij + 0.5)

dmj = i=1                      (1) Calculations can be made for each
Σnij separate species, or all the fish from a

single family, or the study
where p: total number of observations (occurrences) of population using data from one or more
species j (one observation can comprise several individu- transects.  The best overall estimates are
als) obtained by considering all the species taken

nij: number of fish in observation (occurrence) i
as a whole and not by calculating the sum of

(generally i = 1, but it can take on a higher value in the
event of schools) the per species estimates.  Differences

dij: perpendicular distance of fish i from the tran- between these two types of estimates can be
sect. In the case of schools, it becomes: fairly large, especially when the number of

(d1+d2) species is high.
dij = 2

The stock estimate (Q) is made by multiplying
The estimated density can then be obtained the biomass B by the stock distribution surface
by: area:

p Q
Σ j = Bj.A (4)

nij
D where A: surface area of the biotope or zone where the

j = i=1     (2)
dm L

j biomass B estimate was made.

38



Number Length Distance 1 Distance 2 striatus were recorded on both sides of the tran-
(in cm) (in m) (in m) sect: (see table opposite)

1 8 4 4
2 10 1 2 By applying Equation (1), the weighted distance is
2 22 2 2 equal to:
7 12 2 4 dmj = 1(4+0,5) + 2(0,5+1,5) +....+ 7(7+0,5) = 4,23 m
2 18 4 6 64
3 22 4 4
4 18 3 4

The mean density estimate for this transect can,
3 15 5 6
2 20 3 4 then, be obtained by using Equation (2) which pro-
4 15 3 4 duces:
2 22 3 4 64  
4 15 5 6 D = = 0,151 individuals/m2

1 17 4 4 2 x 4,23 x 50

2 15 5 6
6 11 2 4 Note: If the same operation had been carried out
1 18 4 4 using a transect with a fixed five-metre width, densi-
10 15 0 3 ty would have been equal to:
1 20 3 3 48   
7 13 6 8 D = = 0,096 individuals/m2

64 = Total number of fish 2 x 5 x 50
48 = Total number of fish between 0 - 5 m 

This value is underestimated compared with that
obtained by variable distance counting.

Example of calculating the weighted mean
distance, density and biomass: For this species, using the length – weight ratio W =
The selected example comes from the results of 0.0254L3.027 obtained by Letourneur et al. (1999), it
observations made during a dive on 28 November is possible to calculate the mean weight for each
1998 at Station #4 in the Namoui Marine Reserve individual or group of individuals. The result of this
on Niue. A total of 64 individuals of Ctenochaetus calculation is presented in the following table.

39



Number Length Individual Weight IV.3 – Calculating the accuracy of
(n) (in cm) weight (W) density and biomass estimates

(in g) (in g)

1 8 14 14 It is difficult to simply estimate the accuracy
2 10 27 54 of a measurement by taking into account all
2 22 294 588 the sources of error while at the same time
7 12 47 329 integrating all the sources of variability into a
2 18 160 320 single clear calculation. It is, however, possible
3 22 294 882 to approach estimate accuracy through an
4 18 160 641
3 15 92 277 initial descriptive analysis of the samples. In

2 20 220 441 cases such as ours, where the sampling unit
4 15 92 369 is a transect, dispersion (or variance)
2 22 294 588 between transects can be calculated for any
4 15 92 369 given biotope and/or point in time.This
1 17 135 135 makes it possible to calculate the standard
2 15 92 184 deviation for density or biomass measure-
6 11 36 216 ments and thus establish comparisons for
1 18 160 160 the sample between prospected biotopes
10 15 92 922 or two points in time.This calculation gives
1 20 220 220

an idea of the accuracy of estimates on the
7 13 60 419

Total weight = 7127 scale of the target population.

By applying Equation (3), the biomass is equal to: Inter-transect variance (S2) for density is
found by (see definition of variance on

B = 7127       = 16.9 g/m2 page 24):
2 x 4.23 x 50 n

2 Σ ( - )
= i Di D 2

SD (5)
n     

40



where Di: density in transect i mated density and biomass values for each transect
D: mean density of transects for a given biotope and all observed species combined are given in the
n: number of transects

following table:

For the biomass, it equals:
n

2
S Σ ( - )

= i Bi B 2

B (6) Sub-intertidal reef flat Fringing reef slope
n     Transect Density Biomass Transect Density Biomass

no. (ind/m2) (g/m2) no (ind/m2) (g/m2)

where Bi: biomass in transect i 3 0.194 24.8 1 0.197 41.7
B: mean density of transects for a given biotope 4 0.327 42.7 2 0.257 61.5
n: number of transects 5 0.449 53.0 6 0.245 32.6

8 0.782 98.0 7 0.305 67.4
The square root of the variance (standard devi- 9 0.355 66.1 10 0.389 69.3
ation) is used so that work can be carried out 12 0.281 52.1 11 0.560 99.9
in the same measuring unit as that used for the 13 0.315 71.1 14 0.217 29.9

16 0.419 66.5 15 0.455 61.3
mean. Standard deviation for density is

Average 0.390 59.3 Average 0.328 57.0
obtained by:

SD =  √S2 (7)
D

For biomass, standard deviation equals: Density variance on the sub-intertidal reef flat was
SB =  √S2 (8) calculated by applying Equation (5). It equalled:

B

(0.194-0.390)2 + (0.327-0.390)2+ ... +(0.419-0.390)2 

Model calculation S2= = 0.027
8

During a duty travel in 1998, a census on fish of
interest for consumption and marketing was con- Standard deviation for the density measurement
ducted in the Namoui Marine Reserve on Niue.Two was calculated through variance by applying
biotopes were selected, the sub-intertidal reef flat Equation (7), which gave:
and the fringing reef slope. A total of 16 transects
were made (i.e. eight for each biotope). The esti- SD =  √0.027 = 0.165 individus/m2

41



The estimated density for the sample was equal to IV.5 – Initial analysis of results
the mean of the measurements plus or minus stan-
dard deviation (i.e. 0.390 ± 0.165 individuals/m2). IV.5.1 – Comparing results

Biotope Sub-intertidal reef flat Fringing reef slope a) Density and biomass
Parameter Density Biomass Density Biomass An initial interpretation of the results can
Variance 0.027 411.2 0.014 462.0 easily be conducted by plotting on a graph
Standard deviation 0.165 20.3 0.120 21.5

the means and standard deviation values
for the biomasses and densities obtained

IV.4 – Mean composition of substrate from different environments or at different
and living organism cover times. In the figure below, the mean bio-

mass values have been calculated for the
A total of 150 features are recorded for various reef biotopes that make up the
transects and 50 features for stationary eastern and western lagoons of the
points. For each category of substrate and Northern Province of New Caledonia.
living organism cover, the mean composi- These means are symbolised by dots or
tion is expressed as a percentage of the triangles and the confidence intervals by
total number of observations. It is bars whose ends indicate the minimum
obtained by: and maximum values on either side of the

mean. On small island reefs, the fact that
CM nr   

= x100
NR the bars overlap suggests that biomasses

are not significantly different. On the other
Where: nr : number of readings for each category hand, for the other two environments

of substrate or covering organism (fringing and barrier reefs), the values
NR: total number of readings obtained on the west coast are significantly

For the mean substrate composition, higher than those on the east coast.This
the sum of the percentages from all same graphic exercise can be conducted
categories must equal 100%. using the results obtained in the model cal-

culation in Section IV.3.The sample does

42



not show any differences in density or bio- b) Mean composition of the substrate and
mass between the values estimated for covering organisms
either the sub-intertidal reef flat or the
fringing reef slope.This type of analysis can Initial comparisons can be made by simply
allow simple initial comparison of biotopes converting the values into bar graphs. In
or sampled areas as well as comparisons the figures below, the values for each
between regular time intervals within a sin- component of the substrate and covering
gle environment (resource monitoring). organisms were estimated on the slopes
Differences can be validated statistically at and flats of two sections of the fringing
a later time. reef around the island of Niue (Avatele

and the Namoui Marine Reserve). These
400 results were expressed in terms of per-
350 centages and then displayed as bar graphs,

and show there were no significant differ-
300

ences in the mean composition of the
250 substrate and the living organism cover
200 between the sites and biotopes. The sub-

strate was composed mainly of hard bot-
150

tom with a high predominance of rock
100 (more than 80%). Living organism cover

Fringing reefs Small island reefs Barrier reefs
was about 50% of the total surface area,

Eastern zone
Western zone mainly in the form of small branching

corals. Coral heads, encrusting corals and
Graphic representation of biomass by reef types studied in the large branching corals accounted for

eastern and western lagoons of the Northern Province of
New Caledonia.The bars correspond to standard deviations lower percentages.

around the mean (dots or triangles)

43

Biomass (in g/m2)



Namoui Marine Reserve Avatele (outside reserve)

Coral
100 1000

Slab

80 Rock 80
Large boulders

60 Small boulders 60

Debris
40 40

Gravel

Coarse sand
20 20

Fine sand

Mud
0 0

Slope Flat Slope Flat

Graph of the mean substrate’s composition on two sites of the island of Niue

Namoui Marine Reserve Avatele (outside reserve)

600 60
Sponges

500 Millepora coral 50

400 Coral head or encrusting coral
40

Small branch coral
300

Large branch coral 30

200 Alcyonaria 20
Brown seaweed

100
Green seaweed 10

0 Seagrass 0
Slope Flat Slope Flat

Graph of the living organism cover (in %) at two sites of the island of Niue

44



IV.5.2 – Correlations between fish and environ- most of them, thereby revealing a trend.
mental factors This initial analysis can be strengthened by

analysing the correlation between parame-
Analysing correlations between fish and ters taken in pairs and then trying to arrive
environmental factors makes it possible to at a curve which passes through a maxi-
determine possible links between the mum number of dots (e.g. by carrying out
parameters of the population or section of a regression through the least-squares
the population (mean species richness, den- method). A correlation coefficient can
sity or biomass) and certain basic elements then be calculated and tested statistically.
of the habitat and environment (substrate
or living organism cover components).

An initial empirical approach can be devel-
oped very simply. This consists of analysing
on a graph the dispersion of dots denoting
estimated values of selected population
parameters (e.g. mean species richness,
density or biomass) for a group of stations
(each dot represents the results from one
station) on the ‘y’ ordinate in relation to
the percentage of a component of the
substrate or a category of covering organ-
isms on the ‘x’ axis. Two cases are possible.
In the first instance, the scatterplot is dis-
persed and does not reveal any kind of
correlation. In the second instance, the
dots seem to be non-randomly distributed
and it is possible to make a curve with

45



1st case 2nd case
(R = 0.20) (R = 0.93)

x x
Substrate component or living organism cover 

category (e.g. coral cover)

Theoretical representations of estimated fish population parameters by the nature of the sub-
strate and covering organisms. First case: dispersed scatterplot, no trend; second case: the scat-

terplot shows a trend demonstrated by the straight line.
(R = correlation coefficient)

46

y
Species richness
biomass density

y



V - CONCLUSIONS

The use of variable distance underwater prove possible, do not hesitate to request
visual census survey methods can pro- the advice of specialists, who can always

vide appropriate responses to questions process the data if they are of adequate
raised during the assessment of reef and quality.
lagoon fish resources.

IN SUMMARY…
However, implementing these methods Always remember that information collection
involves paying attention to certain rules and processing are two sides of the same coin
and precautions in order to obtain usable and are, therefore, interdependent.
and, therefore, acceptable results. These
rules can seem too numerous or too com-
plicated, but this is not the case at all. They
can be learned easily and gradually.
Thereafter, training and regular practice are
the only way of guaranteeing that the skills
are acquired and maintained. Any skill will
become rusty if it is not practiced on a
regular basis.

As for data processing, a large range of
possible statistical processing and analysis
techniques exists. Depending on the infor-
mation sought and the questions raised by
the assessment, it is always possible to
refer to specialised works in order to
begin using them. But if this should not

47



48



Appendix 1. Outlines of the major fish families that are of food 
and/or commercial interest

Acanthuridae

Kyphosidae Mullidae

Carangidae

Labridae Scaridae

Caesionidae

Lethrinidae Serranidae

Haemulidae

Holocentridae Lutjanidae Siganidae

Source: Fishes of the Great Barrier Reef and Coral Sea. Randall et al. 1997

49



Appendix 2. List of fish species that are of food and/or 
commercial interest

ACANTHURIDAE Epinephelus fuscoguttatus LETHRINIDAE Parupeneus barberinus
Acanthurus achilles Epinephelus hexagonatus Gnathodentex aureolineatus Parupeneus bifasciatus
Acanthurus albipectoralis Epinephelus howlandi Gymnocranius euanus Parupeneus ciliatus
Acanthurus blochii Epinephelus macrospilos Gymnocranius grandoculis Parupeneus cyclostomus
Acanthurus dussumieri Epinephelus maculatus Lethrinus atkinsoni Parupeneus dispilurus
Acanthurus lineatus Epinephelus malabaricus Lethrinus erythracanthus Parupeneus heptacanthus
Acanthurus mata Epinephelus merra Lethrinus genivitattus Parupeneus indicus
Acanthurus nigricans Epinephelus ongus Lethrinus harak Parupeneus multifasciatus
Acanthurus nigricauda Epinephelus polyphekadion Lethrinus kallopterus Parupeneus pleurospilos
Acanthurus nigrofuscus Epinephelus rivulatus Lethrinus lentjan Parupeneus pleurostigma
Acanthurus olivaceus Epinephelus suilus Lethrinus nebulosus Parupeneus spilurus
Acanthurus pyroferus Epinephelus tauvina Lethrinus obsoletus Upeneus tragula
Acanthurus triostegus Plectropomus laevis Lethrinus olivaceus Upeneus vittatus
Acanthurus xanthopterus Plectropomus leopardus Lethrinus rubrioperculatus
Ctenochaetus binotatus Plectropomus maculatus Lethrinus variegatus SIGANIDAE
Ctenochaetus striatus Variola louti Lethrinus xanthochilus Siganus argenteus
Naso annulatus Monotaxis grandoculis Siganus corallinus
Naso brachycentron SCARIDAE Siganus doliatus
Naso brevirostris Bolbometopon muricatum LUTJANIDAE Siganus fuscescens
Naso hexacanthus Cetoscarus bicolor Aprion virescens Siganus lineatus
Naso lituratus Chlorurus bleekeri Lutjanus adetii Siganus oramin
Naso tuberosus Chlorurus sordidus Lutjanus argentimaculatus Siganus puellus
Naso unicornis Hipposcarus longiceps Lutjanus bohar Siganus punctatus
Naso vomer Scarus altipinnis Lutjanus fulviflamma Siganus spinus
Paracanthurus hepatus Scarus chameleon Lutjanus fulvus Siganus vulpinus
Zebrasoma flavescens Scarus flavipectoralis Lutjanus gibbus
Zebrasoma scopas Scarus forsteni Lutjanus kasmira HAEMULIDAE
Zebrasoma veliferum Scarus frenatus Lutjanus lutjanus Diagramma pictum

Scarus ghobban Lutjanus monostigma Plectorhinchus chaetodonoides
SERRANIDAE Scarus globiceps Lutjanus quinquelineatus Plectorhinchus diagrammus
Anyperodon leucogrammicus Scarus longipinnis Lutjanus rivulatus Plectorhinchus gibbosus
Cephalopholis argus Scarus microrhinos Lutjanus russelli Plectorhinchus goldmanni
Cephalopholis boenack Scarus niger Lutjanus sebae Plectorhinchus obscurum
Cephalopholis miniata Scarus oviceps Lutjanus vitta Plectorhinchus orientalis
Cephalopholis sexmaculata Scarus psittacus Macolor macularis Plectorhinchus picus
Cephalopholis sonnerati Scarus quoyi Macolor niger Pomadasys argenteus
Cephalopholis urodeta Scarus rivulatus Pristipomoides multidens
Cromileptes altivelis Scarus rubroviolaceus Symphorus nematophorus CAESIONIDAE
Epinephelus areolatus Scarus schlegeli Caesio caerulaurea
Epinephelus caeruleopunctatus Scarus spinus MULLIDAE Caesio cuning
Epinephelus coioides Mulloides flavolineatus Pterocaesio trilineata
Epinephelus cyanopodus Mulloides vanicolensis Pterocaesio tile
Epinephelus fasciatus Parupeneus barberinoides

50



Appendix 3. Fish census record sheet

LOCATION: PAGE:

DATE LAT. LONG. TRA. DI.

REC. SCIENTIFIC NAME CODE NUM LGT ST D1 D2

Key: LAT: latitude; LONG: longitude;TRA: transect or stationary point number; DI: diver identification number;
REC: record number (optional); CODE: fish code; NUM: number of fish seen; LGT: estimated length (in cm); ST:
observation sector (from 0 to 4); D1: distance 1 (in m); D2: distance 2 (in m).

51



Appendix 4. Environmental factors record sheet

Site no.: __________         Site name: _______________________ Visibility (m): __________
Latitude (deg/min/sec): __________ Longitude (deg/min/sec): __________
Date (day/month/year): ______ Current (none: 0, weak: 1, strong: 2): ____
Fringing reef:_________  Middle reef:_______ Barrier reef: ______ Seagrass bed: ______
Others (explain): _____________  Windward: ___________________ Leeward:___________
Site description (15-20 words) :___________________________________________________

S Depth. Substrates % Living Organisms % Other No

0 Min: Mud  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Seagrass  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Diadema . . . . 
............... Sand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Brown algae  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . sea urchins . . . . 

Gravel and debris . . . . Other algae  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2 mm-5 cm  . . . . . . . . . . . . Alcyonaria (soft coral)  . . . . . . . . . Other sea . . . . 

Max: Small boulders 5-30 cm . . . . Encrusting coral  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . urchins . . . . 
............... Large boulders 30-100 cm . . . . Massive or sub-massive coral . . . . 

Rock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Branch coral  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Sea . . . . 
Slab  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table coral  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . cucumbers 
Dead coral  . . . . . . . . . . . . . Leaf coral  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Other . . . . 

Millepora  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mushroom coral  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

1 Min: Mud  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Seagrass  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Diadema . . . . 
............... Sand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Brown algae  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . sea urchins . . . . 

Gravel and debris Other algae  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2 mm-5 cm  . . . . . . . . . . . . Alcyonaria (soft coral)  . . . . . . . . . Other sea . . . . 

Max: Small boulders 5-30 cm . . . . Encrusting coral  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . urchins . . . . 
............... Large boulders 30-100 cm . . . . Massive or sub-massive coral . . . . 

Rock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Branch coral  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Sea . . . . 
Slab  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table coral  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . cucumbers 
Dead coral  . . . . . . . . . . . . . Leaf coral  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Other . . . . 

Millepora  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mushroom coral  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

2 Mud  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Seagrass  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Diadema . . . . 
Sand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Brown algae  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . sea urchins . . . . 

52



To find out more…
… about tropical fish and invertebrates

In English
Fishes of the Great Barrier Reef and Coral Sea. John E. Randall, Gerald R. Allen and Roger C.
Steene. University of Hawai’i Press, 2840 Kolowalu Street, Honolulu, Hawaii 96822.
ISBN 0-8248-1895-4 (1997).

Coral Reef Fishes, Indo-Pacific and Caribbean. Ewald Lieske and Robert Myers. Harper Collins pub-
lishers, 77-85 Fulham Palace Road, London W6 8JB, UK. ISBN 0-00-219974-2 (1994).

Micronesian Reef Fishes. Robert F. Myers. Coral Graphics, P.O. Box 21153, Guam Main Facility,
Barrigada,Territory of Guam 96921, USA. ISBN 0-3621564-5-0 (1999).

Tropical Pacific Invertebrates. Patrick L. Colin and Charles Arneson. Coral Reef Press, 270 North
Canon Drive, Suite 1524, Beverly Hills, California 90210, USA. ISBN 0-9645625-0-2 (1995).

FishBase 2000. CD ROM. c/o ICLARM, MCPO Box 2631, 0718 Makati City, Philippines. (This data-
base can also be consulted on the Internet at the following URL: http://www.fishbase.org).

Length-Weight Relationship of Fishes from Coral Reefs and Lagoons of New Caledonia – An
Update. Letourneur,Y., M. Kulbicki, and P. Labrosse. NAGA, the ICLARM quarterly (21)4: 39-46
(1998).

FISHEYE, database on fish in the South Pacific. IRD (formerly ORSTOM). (This database can also be
consulted on the Internet at the following URL: http://noumea.ird.nc/BASE/FISHEYE).

53



In French
Poissons de Nouvelle-Calédonie. Pierre Laboute et René Grandperrin. Editions Catherine Ledru, 13 rue
Victor Hugo, Baie de l’Orphelinat, 98 800 Nouméa, Nouvelle-Calédonie. ISBN 2-9505784-3-8 (2000).

FISHEYE, base de connaissances sur les poissons du Pacifique Sud. IRD (anciennement ORSTOM),
base de données consultable sur Internet à l’adresse suivante :
http://noumea.ird.nc/en/BasCo.html 

Guide des poissons des récifs coralliens, région Caraïbes, océan Indien, océan Pacifique, mer
Rouge. Ewald Lieske et Robert Myers. Delachaux et Niestlé (Eds), 79 route d’Oron, 1000 Lausanne
21, Suisse. ISBN 2-603-00982-6 (1995).

… about Underwater Visual Census
In English
Manual for Assessing Fish Stocks on Pacific Coral Reefs. Melita Samoilys (ed). Department of
Primary Industries, GPO Box 46, Brisbane Qld 4001, Australia. ISBN 0812-000, ISBN 0-7242-6774-3
(1997).

Survey Manual for Tropical Marine Resources (2nd Edition). S. English, C.Wilkinson and V. Baker
(eds). Australian Institute of Marine Science,Townsville, Queensland, Australia. ISBN 0-642-25953-4
(1997).

Evaluation of Sampling Methods for Reef Fish Populations of Commercial and Recreational Interest.
Cappo M., Brown I.W. CRC Reef Research Technical Report n°6. ISBN 1 876054 06 9 (1996).

In French
Évaluation visuelle des peuplements et populations de poissons : méthodes et problèmes.
M.L. Harmelin-Vivien, J.G. Harmelin, C. Chauvet, C. Duval, R. Galzin, P. Lejeune, G. Barnabé, F. Blanc, R.
Chevalier, J. Duclerc, G. Laserre. Revue d’Écologie (Terre Vie),Vol. 40, 1985.

54